[10]
The applicant submits that the Board did not consider whether he was a Convention refugee based on his membership in a particular social group, namely being a defector under section 96 of IRPA or whether he was a person in need of protection under subsection 97(1)(b) of IRPA. The Court disagrees. The Board did decide that the documentary evidence is that the Government of Iran would not persecute the applicant for simply failing to return to Iran, i.e. defecting. However, that does not mean that the applicant may not be sanctioned in accordance with the law of Iran for violating the terms of his exit visa. This type of sanction does not equate to the risk of punishment or sanction contemplated by section 96 and 97 of IRPA. The Federal Court of Appeal has held that a person, such as the applicant, who has not been subject to persecution cannot create a ground of persecution (or need of protection) by freely, on their own accord, violating the terms of their exit visa and making themselves liable to punishment upon their return. In Vialentin v. Canada (MEI), [1991] 3 F.C. 390 the Federal Court of Appeal held at paragraph 8 per Marceau J.A.:
8 I will say, first, that while in humanitarian terms I am very much inclined to sympathize with the idea of granting refugee status to everyone who faces criminal sanctions such as those imposed by section 109 of the Czech Criminal Code, in practical and legal terms the idea seems to me to be illogical and without any rational basis.
Neither the international Convention nor our Act, which is based on it, as I understand it, had in mind the protection of people who, having been subjected to no persecution to date, themselves created a cause to fear persecution by freely, of their own accord and with no reason, making themselves liable to punishment for violating a criminal law of general application
. I would add, with due respect for the very widely held contrary opinion, that the idea does not appear to me even to be supported by the fact that the transgression was motivated by some dissatisfaction of a political nature (on this point, see, inter alia, Goodwin-Gill, op. cit., pages 32 et seq.; James C. Hathaway, The Law of Refugee Status, pages 40 et seq.),
because it seems to me, first, that an isolated sentence can only in very exceptional cases satisfy the element of repetition and relentlessness found at the heart of persecution
(cf. Rajudeen v. Minister of Employment and Immigration (1984), 55 N.R. 129 (F.C.A.)),
but particularly because the direct relationship that is required between the sentence incurred and imposed and the offender's political opinion does not exist
. [emphasis added]
To paraphrase the Federal Court of Appeal in Valentin, supra, a defector cannot gain legal status in Canada under IRPA by creating a "need for protection" under section 97 of IRPA by freely, of their own accord and with no reason, making themselves liable to punishment by violating a law of general application in their home country about complying with exit visas, i.e. returning. As worthy as the applicant may be for Canadian immigrant status, the Refugee Board, and this Court, do not have the legal jurisdiction to grant defectors legal status.