[16]
There is in effect a customs union between Puerto Rico and the United States. This has been created, not by the U.S.
Constitution
, but by U.S. laws. As I understand it, neither Congress nor the Legislature of Puerto Rico is bound by the following constraints in the U.S.
Constitution
concerning taxes on exports or imports: Article I, s. 8, clause 1 which requires that "any duties, imposts and excises" levied by Congress "shall be uniform throughout the United States"; Article I, s. 9, clause 5 which prohibits Congress from levying a tax or duty on articles "exported from any state"; and Article I, s. 10, clause 2, which provides that no state shall, without the consent of Congress, "lay any imposts or duties on imports or exports, except what may be absolutely necessary for executing its inspection laws ...". Congress through the exercise of the commerce power, and freed of such constitutional constraints, is able to place Puerto Rico for customs purposes in a position analogous to any other part of the country, with some differences. By federal law the same duties are imposed on goods coming into Puerto Rico from other countries as are imposed on goods coming into the United States. Customs duties are collected by federal officers, but the revenues collected on goods coming into Puerto Rico are paid into the Puerto Rican treasury. Goods from the United States enter Puerto Rico free of duty, subject to the right of Puerto Rico to impose a tariff on coffee coming into Puerto Rico either from other countries or from the United States. (As coffee enters the United States free of duty and as Puerto Rico wanted to protect its coffee industry, this exception was made so that Puerto Rico protective measures would not be evaded, by transshipment through the United States, of coffee from other countries.) According to the evidence, the only barrier to the entry of Puerto Rican goods into the United States is a quota imposed on sugar imports. Puerto Rico can impose sales or other taxes on goods as soon as they enter Puerto Rico as long as it does not discriminate as between goods from the United States and locally produced goods. Revenues from such local taxes go, of course, to the Puerto Rican treasury. Of more special interest for present purposes, excise taxes collected in the United States on goods originating in Puerto Rico and sold in the United States are paid over to the Puerto Rican treasury. Thus there is a distinct revenue advantage for Puerto Rico in having certain of its goods sold in the United States.