[28]
It is perhaps more useful to consider the purpose of the Puerto Rican tax exemption in question which I do on the basis of interpretative materials provided by the expert witnesses. When the exemption was adopted in 1975 it was explained that for the exemption to be earned it was necessary that there be an increase in production or processing of distilled spirits in Puerto Rico combined with their shipment and sale in the United States. The Treasury Committee report to the Puerto Rico House of Representatives on both the Senate bill and House bill in that legislature stated
"The purpose of this measure is to increase the revenues of the Treasury of Puerto Rico, [by] promoting the export of distilled spirits to the United States since the ... [federal tax] paid by our industry ... [on] such ... [exports] reverts to the general fund of the Commonwealth of Puerto Rico.
"We recommend the measure because we understand that this type of exemption serves as an incentive to distillers in Puerto Rico to invest more resources in the promotion of their sales in the United States market, and on the other hand it induces other firms to import distilled spirits to terminate the processing and bottling in Puerto Rico with the purpose of [subsequently] exporting [such products] to the continental United States market ...
"... It [is] evident, that the industry needs an incentive that stimulates making new investments in necessary facilitites [sic] [in order] to continue achieving an adequate penetration of the continental [United States] market of distilled spirits."
It is clear that this was not a typical export incentive to encourage domestic producers to sell outside of their domestic market for the purpose of earning more foreign exchange or improving the balance of payments of the producing country. Instead, it was to promote sales within essentially a domestic market, a common market including Puerto Rico and the United States between which, with very small exceptions, there are no customs duties or trade barriers. There is no question of earning foreign exchange as these two entities have a common currency and the balance of payments of Puerto Rico forms part of the balance of payments of the United States in terms of international trade. The essential purpose of the tax incentive is thus not to give Puerto Rican producers an advantage in selling in a nondomestic market but rather to increase the revenues of the Puerto Rican government by encouraging sales in the United States, a domestic market, where the excise taxes collected will revert to the Commonwealth treasury. It follows that such a tax incentive is not an "export incentive".