[11]
The investigators of the complaints produced reports in the middle of January 1997, and on 3 March of that year the War­den of the Atlantic Institution terminated the applicant's employment, by letter in the following terms:
"I have completed a full review of the Harassment Investigation of the complaint by Karen Matthews and the Disciplinary Investigation completed by Unit Manager, John Harris and Senior Personnel Advisor, Charlene Sullivan. You have received copies of both investigations. The Disci­plinary Hearing was held, this date with your representative. I have responded to the issues you raised during this hearing. All the above information was taken into account in arriving at my decision.
"Throughout the said investigations and including the Disciplinary Hearing you have consistently denied any involvement in the said sexual harassment of Ms. Mat­thews. You have not presented any mitigat­ing circumstances.
"I now find that you are guilty of sexually harassing Ms. Matthews on November 17, 1996, inside the penitentiary. This serious misconduct constitutes a major breach of the CSC Code of Discipline.
"The Correctional Service of Canada has signed a 'Zero Tolerance Policy on Ha­rassment' with the Union of the Solicitor General Employees. You are aware, or ought to have been aware, of this policy.
"I have carefully reviewed this misconduct and your employment record. Your be­haviour has resulted in a situation in which I no longer have the confidence in your ability to maintain professional relation­ships with fellow employees. You are a peace officer and have sworn to uphold the law. Based on the above, I have concluded it is necessary to terminate your employ­ment.
"Therefore, by virtue of the authority delegated to me pursuant to article 11(2) of the
Financial Administration Act
, I must inform you that I hereby terminate your employment with the Correctional Service of Canada effective 1500 hours, 03 March 1997.
"You have the right, in accordance with your collective agreement, to present a grievance relating this action directly to the final level of the procedure." [see footnote 1]