[5]
These defects in the Canadian Patent Application if in fact the same process is involved may well give rise to a serious legal argument as to the validity of plaintiffs' Canadian patent. In another action between the same parties dealing with patents for another section of the Paper Making Machine, a judgment reported in (1984), 78 C.P.R.(2d), considered at pages 20 and following the effect of erroneous statements in Canadian Patent Applications. Reference was made to the case of Canadian Marconi Company et al. v. Vera Prinzen Enterprises Limited et al. (1964), 46 C.P.R. 97, in which Thurlow, J., as he then was, held at page 141 that an improper claim to convention priority based on the U.S. Application was not a material allegation on the petition which had rendered the patent void, as the inventor would still have been entitled to a patent even if he might not have been entitled to the benefit of an early filing date based on convention priority. A discussion then followed as to whether the wording of the form now used would change the result of this judgment. The Beloit v. Valmet Oy judgment was recently reversed on appeal. File No. A-362-84, judgment dated February 10th, 1986 [See 64 N.R. 287], but the Trial Court was sustained on the misrepresentation issue. In that case however it was only s. 55 of the Act which was in issue and the arguments dealt with erroneous claims as to convention priority, whereas in the present case s. 28(2) is also invoked dealing with the failure to mention the Argentinian patent which had already been issued. It may be argued, however, that the Canadian Application filed on December 4th, 1969, was filed within twelve months of the application for the Argentinian patent on February 13th, 1969, which would appear to bring the Canadian Application within the exception of sub-paragraph (b) of subsection (2) of s. 28. These are not issues to be decided on the present motion, however, and are only referred to with a view to attempting to determine whether defendant would be likely to succeed if this legal issue were set down for hearing before the trial of the action on the merits.