[11]
Plaintiffs' counsel in opposing the motion referred to jurisprudence including the case of Central Canada Potash Co. Limited and Attorney General of Canada et al., [1974] 6 W.W.R. 374, in the Saskatchewan Court of Appeal, in which although the Saskatchewan Rules permitted an order such as that sought by defendant, the judgment at page 376 referred to the judgment of Emma Silver Mining Co. v. Grant (1879), 11 Ch. D. 918, in which it was stated at page 927:
"In the case of this kind my opinion is that the judge must have some evidence which will make it at least probable that the issue will put an end to the action. The plaintiff is not to be harassed at the instance of the defendant by a series of trials, each trial taking issue on every link of the plaintiff's case. That is not the meaning of the rule as I understand it, but it may properly be applied in such a case as that I have stated, where the judge has serious reason to believe that the trial of the issue will put an end to the action."
At page 377 the judgment refers to a decision in the case of Morrison-Knudsen Co. v. B.C. Hydro & Power Authority, [1972] 3 W.W.R. 35, in which Macdonald, J., of the Supreme Court of British Columbia had before him an application that certain issues of mixed fact and law be tried before other issues in the action. He granted the order but the judgment of Chief Justice Culliton in the Central Canada Potash case, which refers to it, states:
"While the learned Justice granted the order, I think he properly set forth the principles to be followed in the determination of such an application. He said, in effect, that separate trials should be granted only in exceptional cases, and in cases where the issues to be tried separately are simple, and that there should be some evidence which makes it at least probable that the trial of the separate issue will put an end to the action.
"I think the principle is accepted by all courts that a piecemeal trial of an action must be avoided. It appears as well that courts are reluctant to have a separate trial of an issue if, in the disposition of that issue, all or most of the evidence will be called that would have been called to dispose of all the issues."
In the case of Waller v. Independent Order of Foresters (1905), 5 O.W.R. 421 (C.A.), Chief Justice Meredith stated at page 422:
"Experience has shown that seldom, if ever, is any advantage gained by trying some of the issues before the trial of the others is entered upon, and certainly in this case the result of adopting that course is most unsatisfactory.
"If the result of the preliminary trial in his case, whichever way it had resulted, would have put an end to the controversy, or if the trial judge had reserved to himself the further trial of the action in case a further trial should be necessary, it would have been different."
Again on the same page:
"It is far better, I think, that the erroneous steps which have been taken should be retraced, and that the case should go down to trial again, when all the questions of law and fact will be tried at the same time, and one judgment pronounced on the whole case."
In the case of Asbjorn Hogard A/S v. Northwest Tackle Manufacturing Ltd. et al., 56 C.P.R.(2d) 115, dealing with an application to set down an issue of law for determination pursuant to Rule 474 I referred at page 119 in connection with delay in making the motion.
"Plaintiff points out, not without justification, that it is somewhat belated for defendants to seek the determination of the question of law after the pleadings have been completed and an application has been made for discovery of an officer of defendant companies."
In the present case proceedings were instituted in April 1983 and discoveries are substantially completed with the possible exception of a few outstanding answers, so that in fact plaintiff has set down a motion seeking a date for hearing, but it is only now that defendant seeks to determine as a preliminary issue the validity of plaintiffs' patent resulting from the statements in the application for same, which is only one of the issues in dispute, although admittedly if defendant succeeded on it, this might well result in the action being dismissed.