[8]
I turn to necessity. In
Mohan
, supra, Sopinka, J., relying on the dicta of Dickson, J. (as he then was), in
R. v. Abbey
, [1982] 2 S.C.R. 24; 43 N.R. 30; 138 D.L.R.(3d) 202; [1983] 1 W.W.R. 251; 39 B.C.L.R. 201; 29 C.R.(3d) 193; 68 C.C.C.(2d) 394, provides some guidance as to the applicable standard for determining whether expert evidence is necessary. At p. 23 of
Mohan
he states:
"In
R. v. Abbey
, supra, Dickson, J., as he then was, stated, at p. 42:
'With respect to matters calling for special knowledge, an expert in the field may draw inferences and state his opinion. An expert's function is precisely this: to provide the judge and jury with a ready-made inference which the judge and jury, due to the technical nature of the facts, are unable to formulate. "An expert's opinion is admissible to furnish the court with scientific information which is likely to be outside the experience and knowledge of a judge or jury. If on the proven facts a judge or jury can form their own conclusions without help, then the opinion of the expert is unnecessary" (
Turner
(1974), 60 Crim. App. R. 80, at p. 83, per Lawton, L.J.)'
"This pre-condition is often expressed in terms as to whether the evidence would be helpful to the trier of fact. The word 'helpful' is not quite appropriate and sets too low a standard. However, I would not judge necessity by too strict a standard. What is required is that the opinion be necessary in the sense that it provide information 'which is likely to be outside the experience and knowledge of a judge or jury': as quoted by Dickson, J., in
R. v. Abbey
, supra. As stated by Dickson, J., the evidence must be necessary to enable the trier of fact to appreciate the matters in issue due to their technical nature."
The question then is whether Mr. Hobbs will provide information that is outside the experience and knowledge of a judge such that it is necessary to enable the judge to appreciate the matters in issue due to their technical nature. Having regard to Mr. Hobbs' expert report filed in advance by plaintiffs in accordance with the
Rules
of the court, I asked plaintiffs' counsel to point out representative examples of technical areas in the report that were likely to be outside the experience and knowledge of a judge. I am not satisfied that what has been selected as representative is technical in the sense that it is outside the knowledge and experience of a judge.