[8]
More recently, the Federal Court of Appeal has qualified the views expressed by Mr. Justice Hugessen. A more deferential approach to the discretionary decisions of prothonotaries is now preferred. In
Canada v. Aqua-Gem Investments Ltd.
, [1993] 2 F.C. 425; 149 N.R. 273, at p. 462 [F.C.] (F.C.A), the Court of Appeal held that although the judge who sits on appeal from a prothonotary's decision has the power to exercise his or her own discretion de novo, this should be done in limited circumstances. Mr. Justice MacGuigan, writing for the majority, articulated the following standard of review to be applied by a motions judge when deciding whether to disturb the discretionary orders or decisions of prothonotaries (at pp. 462-464) [F.C.]:
"I also agree with the Chief Justice in part as to the standard of review to be applied by a motions judge to a discretionary decision of a prothonotary. Following in particular Lord Wright in
Evans v. Bartlam
, [1937] A.C. 473 (H.L.), at p. 484, and Lacourcière, J.A., in
Stoicevski v. Casement
(1983), 43 O.R.(2d) 436 (Div. Ct.),
discretionary orders of prothonotaries ought not to be disturbed on appeal to a judge unless:
(a) they are clearly wrong, in the sense that the exercise of discretion by the prothonotary was based upon a wrong principle or upon a misapprehension of the facts, or
(b) they raise questions vital to the final issue of the case.
Where such discretionary orders are clearly wrong in that the prothonotary has fallen into error of law (a concept in which I include a discretionary based upon a wrong principle or upon a misapprehension of the facts), or where they raise question vital to the final issue of the case, a judge ought to exercise his own discretion de novo.
"In
Canada v. 'Jala Godavari' (The)
, (1991), 40 C.P.R.(3d) 127 (F.C.A.), this court in an obiter dictum stated the rule the other way around, seeking to emphasize the necessity for the exercise of the judge's discretion de novo, in contradistinction to the view that was at that time gaining acceptance in the Trial Division that the prothonotary's discretion should be followed unless he had committed error of law.
Jala Godavari
should not, I think, be read as meaning that the prothonotary's discretion should never be respected, but rather that it is subject to the overriding discretion by a judge where the question involved is vital to the final issue in the case. (Error of law is, of course, always a reason for intervention by a judge, and is not in any way in controversy)." (pp. 462 & 463 [F.C.]). (emphasis not in original)
Mr. Justice MacGuigan then went on to elaborate upon the meaning of "questions vital to the final issue of the case". After stating that such questions are ones which have the effect of providing a final resolution to the case, Mr. Justice MacGuigan made the following remarks, at pp. 464 and 465 [F.C.]:
"The question before the prothonotary in the case at bar can be considered interlocutory only because the prothonotary decided it in favour of the appellant. If he had decided it for the respondent, it would itself have been a final decision of the case.
. . . . .
"It seems to me that a decision which can thus be either interlocutory or final depending on how it is decided, even if interlocutory because of the result, must nevertheless be considered vital to the final resolution of the case.
Another way of putting the matter would be to say that for the test as to relevance to the final issue, the issue to be decided should be looked to
before
the question is answered by the prothonotary, whereas that as to whether it is interlocutory or final (which is purely a pro forma matter) should be put after the prothonotary's decision
. Any other approach, it seems to me, would reduce the more substantial question of 'vital to the issue of the case' to the merely procedural issue of interlocutory or final, and preserve all interlocutory rulings from attack (except in relation to error of law)." (emphasis not in original text)