[13]
These questions all relate to revenue information and request the production of specification sheets, warehousing invoices and financial summaries which are primarily needed to verify the testimony of Mr. Pollard and to verify the previously-provided gross revenue and expense evidence. The defendant argued that the quantity figures included in these materials are not only damaging to its competitive position but also irrelevant to the main action. The court agrees with the order of the prothonotary and finds that the production of these documents is relevant. However, the prothonotary erred by not considering that the material may potentially be used for the determination of profit margins. The issue of accounting for profits in the main action does not comprise or require the disclosure of profit margins. Any information relating to quantity, because of its connection to profit margins, is irrelevant and is not properly a subject for these particular examinations for discovery. The Court of Appeal stated in
Beloit Canada Limited v. Valmet Oy
, infra, at p. 118, a reference case on accounting for profits, that revenues and costs are proper issues on discovery but that certain limits apply. Mr. Justice Hugessen stated:
"... One of the principal questions on the reference will be to know what part of the profit realized from those sales must be accounted for. Another question, equally important, will be to determine the amount of such profit. In answering those questions the court must be conscious that it is the defendant's wrongdoing which has made the present litigation necessary and that neither the court nor the plaintiff are (sic) obliged to accept, at face value, the defendant's assertions as to its revenues and costs.
On the other hand, the defendant, like any litigant, is entitled to be protected by the court from abusive and unnecessary intrusions into its private affairs
," (emphasis not in original text)
Considering that liability in this current matter has not yet been determined, the defendant should be accorded greater protection from unnecessary intrusions. As per the order of May 12, 1997, the documents in question are compellable, however such compulsion is subject to the defendant's right to obliterate or otherwise conceal any reference to any irrelevant quantity of tickets in that material. In regard to this group of questions, subject only to the above permission to obliterate parts, the appeal is dismissed.
Question 1284, pp. 10 and 19
, (reasons, pp. 10-12 and 19-21) [of original]