[3]
At trial the parties submitted an agreed statement of facts which, omitting only the references to pleadings or to discovery evidence on which these facts are based, provides as follows.
"1. The plaintiff Sunbeam Corporation (Canada) Limited is a corporation incorporated under the laws of Canada and during the relevant time was a manufacturer of small household appliances including electrical appliances, barbecues and garden equipment.
"2. In late 1987, the plaintiff ceased manufacturing small appliances in Canada. The plaintiff, until March 1986, sold small electrical household appliances to retail and wholesale customers. During the period from 1965 through March 1986, the plaintiff accounted for federal sales tax based on the sale price of small electrical household appliances manufactured and sold by it in Canada.
"3. In or about 1965, the Excise Branch of the Department of National Revenue ('Excise') adopted the policy of allowing various manufacturers of floor care products and small electrical household appliances to account for federal sales tax using the 'determined value method' being either the highest regular established single unit tax included price to retailers less an all inclusive discount of 25% or the 'best average price to dealers' less an all inclusive discount of 20%, with tax calculated on the remainder. At various times thereafter, Hoover Company Limited, General Signal and Appliances Limited and Black & Decker Limited accounted for federal sales tax on small electrical appliances based on such determined values, which were requested by the above-mentioned companies and were authorized by Excise. However, as a result of an industry-wide survey, Excise determined that there was no longer a wholesale situation in the small electrical household appliances industry (except for floor products), consequently, Excise cancelled all the previous individual company determined values as of December 31, 1985. The plaintiff's request to use this method was received after the above-noted cancellations.
"4. In June 1981, Excise published its Excise News No. 34 which made reference to an upcoming Excise Communiqué
'A comprehensive listing of the discounts authorized for sales to retailers and users for specific commodities ...'
"In July 1981, Excise issued its Excise Communiqué 57/TI which read, in part, as follows:
'Further to an article published in the June 1981 edition of the "Excise News" this Communiqué has been prepared to provide a comprehensive listing of the discounts authorized for sales to retailers and users for specific commodities. A reference to the existing authority is provided for the currently authorized determined values for the majority of the commodities.'
"At no place in either one of these publications was information relating to the determined value method of valuation, or the all inclusive discount of 20%-25%, which was made available to some of the plaintiff's competitors, upon their request, disclosed.
"It is the defendant's position that the discounts offered to the plaintiff's competitors were company specific and as such there was no way they could be published.
"5. The only method by which a manufacturer of small appliances could make itself aware of a determined value discount being offered to its competitors was to contact Excise.
"6. Any individual company's specific determined value is a determined value and any accompanying discount made available to that company by Excise was based on administrative policy and discretion.
"7. The differences between a determined value that is published in the Excise Communiqué and a determined value such as those that existed in the current situation in the small appliance industry, is that industry-wide determined values are published and specific determined values are not.
"8. In 1985, officials of Excise conducted a sales tax audit of the records of the plaintiff. The sales tax auditor calculated federal sales tax on the plaintiff's sale price to retailers.
"9. On September 28, 1986, an agent wrote to Excise on behalf of the plaintiff requesting an authorized determined value discount and a refund for taxes overpaid during the last four years. After two letters from Excise dated November 4, 1986 and February 23, 1987, assuring the plaintiff that the matter was being looked into, the defendant wrote the plaintiff on June 5, 1987 and denied its request. On May 26, 1987, the plaintiff submitted a Refund Claim to Excise in the amount of $1,477,175 for federal sales taxes overpaid on the sale of small electrical appliances during the period September 1, 1982 and March 31, 1986. By letter dated June 5, 1987, the defendant advised the plaintiff that all previously authorized determined values for individual companies had been cancelled as of December 31, 1985, when, in fact, Iona Appliance Inc. (formerly called General Signal Limited) was allowed to continue calculating tax based on its authorized determined value until February 28, 1986.
"10. During the relevant time period four competitors of the plaintiff, Proctor Silex Canada Inc., West Bend of Canada, Toastess Inc. and Unireco Industries Inc., accounted for federal sales tax based on the sale price of the small electrical household appliances manufactured and sold by them in Canada. There is no evidence that the four companies were informed by the Crown of the availability of the determined value nor is there any evidence that they were aware of its availability.
"11. By Notice of Determination dated July 24, 1987, Excise cancelled the plaintiff's refund claim of May 26, 1987 due to its position that a determined value might not be applied retroactively to adjust amounts of tax and computed on sale price.
"12. The plaintiff objected to the Notice of Determination and its objection was acknowledged by Excise in a letter dated November 5, 1987. By Notice of Decision dated March 3, 1989, Excise denied the objection of the plaintiff. Excise, in its Notice of Decision, stated:
'Retroactive application of "determined values" is not accepted as creating a right to recovery of any portion of taxes paid, in the first instance, on the basis of "sale price". The company, having based on the "sale price" which is the statutory basis, has not overpaid tax or paid tax in error. Accordingly, none of the refunding provisions of the
Excise Tax Act
are authority for acceptance in payment of the application submitted.'
"13. In a letter dated August 6, 1986, from Elmer MacKay to Mr. W.G. Birdsall, Vice-President, Finance, General Signal Limited, Excise allowed the retroactive application of a determined value to General Signal Limited. General Signal Limited originally requested a determined value on September 24, 1982, and it was granted April 12, 1983 commencing October 1, 1982. In the letter dated April 6, 1986, the determined value was retroactively applied as of January 1, 1979.
"14. The plaintiff and defendant disagree as to the relevance in law of the tax treatment of other taxpayers who are not parties to this action.
"15. The plaintiff and defendant are agreed that the remedy sought herein by the plaintiff is that it application for refund should be referred back to the Minister under s. 81.38 of the
Excise Tax Act
.
"16. The plaintiff accepts that if the matter is referred back to the Minister as set out in para. 15 above, any refund will be calculated back four years from May 26, 1987."