[35]
In
Reference Re Canada Assistance Plan (B.C.)
, [1991] 2 S.C.R. 525; 127 N.R. 161; 1 B.C.A.C. 241; 1 W.A.C. 241, the Supreme Court of Canada allowed an appeal from the British Columbia Court of Appeal which had found that, in relation to the Canada Assistance Plan, an agreement concluded with the Province of British Columbia, and the conduct of the Government of Canada pursuant to the agreement and the provisions of the Plan itself, gave rise to a legitimate expectation that the Government of Canada would introduce no bill into Parliament to limit its obligations under the agreement or the Plan without the consent of British Columbia. Speaking for the Supreme Court of Canada, Mr. Justice Sopinka said (at p. 557 S.C.R.):
"The doctrine of legitimate expectations was discussed in the reasons of the majority in
Old St. Boniface Residents Assn. Inc. v. Winnipeg (City)
(1990), 3 S.C.R 1170. That judgment cites seven cases dealing with the doctrine, and the goes on (at p. 1204):
'The principle developed in these cases is simply an extension of the rules of natural justice and procedural fairness. It affords a party affected by the decision of a public official an opportunity to make representations in circumstances in which there otherwise would be no such opportunity. The court supplies the omission where, based on the conduct of the public official, a party has been led to believe that his or her rights would not be affected without consultation.'
"It was held by the majority of the court below, and it was argued before us by the Attorney General of British Columbia, that the federal government acted illegally in invoking the power of Parliament to amend the Plan without obtaining the consent of British Columbia ... If the doctrine of legitimate expectations required consent, and not merely consultation, then it would be the source of substantive rights; in this case, a substantive right to veto proposed federal legislation.
"There is no support in Canadian or English cases for the position that the doctrine of legitimate expectations can create substantive rights. It is a part of the rules of procedural fairness which can govern administrative bodies. Where it is applicable, it can create a right to make representations or to be consulted. It does not fetter the decision following the representations or consultation."