[6]
The Prothonotary's decision reads in part as follows:
The Defendant argues that statements made during prosecution of corresponding patent applications in other countries may be relevant to the issues of what the inventor had invented. This broad proposition is not supported by any case law, and fails to take into account the decision of the Supreme Court of Canada in
Free World Trust
v.
Électro Santé ,
2000 S.C.C. 66, which held that patent file wrappers, including representations by inventors, are not admissible in Canada to construe patent claims. The Supreme Court of Canada recognized that there may be circumstances where the prosecution history could be relevant, but only for purposes other than defining the scope of the grant of the monopoly. Justice Blais reached the same conclusion in
Novartis AG
v.
Apotex Inc.
(2001), 15 C.P.R. (4th) 417 at paragraphs 77 to 86.
The allegations in paragraphs 24 to 27 of the Statement of Defence and Counterclaim are solely based on an inventor's declaration from the US File History. In considering the impugned paragraphs of the Statement of Defence and Counterclaim and the proposed use of the inventor's statement therein, I conclude that such reliance contravenes the clear direction from the Supreme Court of Canada in
Free World Trust
. I am therefore satisfied that it is plain and obvious that paragraphs 24, 25, 26, and 27 from the Statement of Defence and Counterclaim do not constitute a reasonable defence, and should be struck.
THIS COURT ORDERS that:
1. Paragraphs 24, 25, 26, and 27 from the Statement of Defence and Counterclaim are hereby struck, with leave to amend provided the amendment does not contravene the reasons for this Order.
2. The Defendant/Plaintiff by Counterclaim shall serve and file its amended Statement of Defence and Counterclaim within ten days of the issuance of this Order.
3. The Plaintiff/Defendant by Counterclaim shall serve and file its Reply to Defence and Counterclaim within ten days of service of the Defendant/Plaintiff by Counterclaim's amended Statement of Defence and Counterclaim.
4. Costs of this motion are fixed in the amount of $1,000, and are awarded to the Plaintiffs/Defendants by Counterclaim in any event of the cause.