[7]
The CRDD had before it reasons of the sentencing judge in respect of the conviction of the applicant for conspiracy to traffic in a narcotic within Canada. Although those reasons are only obliquely referred to by the CRDD in its reasons for decision, I consider them to be important in this judicial review of the CRDD's decision. The reasons of the sentencing judge read in part as follows:
"Three of the four accused (including the applicant herein) present at this proceeding have pleaded guilty to a count of conspiracy to traffic in heroin. The fourth accused has pleaded guilty to possession of the proceeds of crime. The proceeds of crime in his case consisted of the money involved in the sale of some heroin to an undercover police officer.
"With varying degrees of involvement, each accused on the heroin conspiracy count has pleaded guilty to a crime which involved, from my overall perspective, a criminal scheme to traffic in a very substantial quantity of that deadly poisonous substance. The ultimate object of the conspiracy, while its details and essentials may not at the time have been fully in possession of three of the accused who have pleaded guilty, involved the attempted release of serious, dangerous criminals from Kingston penitentiary. The heroin was to be the method of payment made for the release by a breakout from the penitentiary of the criminals who were inside serving lengthy prison terms.
"The list of sophisticated weaponry, including helicopters, to be employed in the prison break is, indeed, long and very serious.
. . . . .
"I am well aware that all of the accused before me for sentence now may not have been involved in the ultimate object of the conspiracy. Without question, however, each has admitted his part in the conspiracy to traffic in heroin, and in the case of the other accused, in his part in the receiving and possession of the proceeds of the purported sale of that heroin to the undercover officer.
"It was indeed fortunate for the public, generally speaking, that an undercover police officer, at no little risk to himself, was able to represent himself as a conspirator in order to break what might have been one of the most serious crimes to be committed in this area, at least for quite a period of time, short of murder. That officer and those who supported him deserve a good deal of credit and gratitude from the public at large, which I feel that I am in the best position to convey.
"The admitted facts disclosed Mr. Murugesu played a very prominent executive part in the execution of the heroin aspect of the conspiracy. The other two accused played a much smaller role. They were Mr. Ratnam and Mr. Thamotharampillai. They were retained, for money, to act as 'mules' or 'runners' for others. Therefore, the sentences to be imposed will reflect the variance of participation and involvement of the three accused. ... Everybody who has pleaded guilty, irresistibly, well knew that the subject in which they dealt was heroin. (Tribunal Record, pp. 415-417)"