[9]
The CRDD's analysis leading it to the conclusion that it must exclude the applicant from Convention refugee status is somewhat lengthy but is, I conclude important to reproduce in full. It reads as follows:
"The Minister's Representative submitted several documents demonstrating that the United Nations has taken a number of initiatives to gain cooperation among member states to counter the drug traffic. Among others, we note in particular the
Single Convention on Narcotic Drugs
, 1961 at p. 38, Article 35, 'Action Against the Illicit Traffic'.
'Having due regard to their constitutional, legal and administrative systems the parties shall:
a) Make arrangements at the national level for co-ordination of preventive and repressive action against the illicit traffic; to this end they may usefully designate an appropriate agency responsible for such coordination;
b) Assist each other in the campaign against the illicit traffic in narcotic drugs;
c) Co-operate closely with each other and with the competent international organizations of which they are members with a view to maintaining a co-ordinated campaign against the illicit traffic.'
"At pp. 39 and 40 we note that Article 36 of that Convention provides for penal provisions for persons involved in the illicit trafficking of narcotics.
"The issue for the panel is whether these initiatives can be construed as part of the United Nations' purposes and principles. The
UNHCR Handbook
provides the following guidance in interpreting the exclusion clause in question.
'162. It will be seen that this very generally-worded exclusion clause overlaps with the exclusion clause in Article 1F(a); for it is evident that a crime against peace, a war crime or a crime against humanity is also an act contrary to the purposes and principles of the United Nations. While Article 1F(c) does not introduce any specific new element, it is intended to cover in a general way such acts against the purposes and principles of the United Nations that might not be fully covered by the two preceding exclusion clauses. Taken in conjunction with the latter, it has to be assumed, although this is not specifically stated, that the acts covered by the present clause must also be of criminal nature.
'163. The purposes and principles of the United Nations are set out in the Preamble and Articles 1 and 2 of the Charter of the United Nations. They enumerate fundamental principles that should govern the conduct of their members in relation to each other and in relation to the international community as a whole. From this it could be inferred that an individual, in order to have committed an act contrary to these principles, must have been in a position of power in a member State and instrumental to his State's infringing these principles. However, there are hardly any precedents on record for the application of this clause, which, due to its very general character should be applied with caution.'
"While the
UNHCR Handbook
is not binding, it is authoritative, and we give it careful consideration.
"Paragraph 163 of the
UNHCR Handbook
directs our attention to the Preamble and Articles and (sic) 1 and 2 of the Charter of the United Nations to find the purposes and principles of the United Nations. There is no mention therein of the crime the claimant has been convicted of, 'conspiracy to traffic in narcotics'. Nevertheless, Chapter 1, Article 1(3) of the Charter of the United Nation reads:
'To achieve international co-operation in solving international problems of an economic, social, cultural or humanitarian character, there is ample evidence that the United Nations has taken many initiatives in respect to the drug problem. In its publication, "The United Nations and Drug Abuse Control", the United Nations lists no fewer than 19 organizations under its umbrella, or associated with it, that have taken action in respect of or solely devoted to the illicit drug issue. The Commission on Narcotic Drugs is one of the economic and social council of the United Nations six functioning commissions. The International Narcotic Control Board was established by the 1961 single Convention on narcotic drugs to limit the cultivation, production, manufacturing and utilization of drugs. There are three units in the United Nations Secretariat responsible for drug abuse control activities. There is a United Nations fund for drug abuse control for which 90 government contributes. (sic)
'The list goes on.'
"In light of this evidence, we determine that the fight against illegal traffic of narcotics is certainly one of the purposes of the United Nations, falling under Article 1(3) of its Charter. We do not think it necessary for the charter to have to identify specifically each and every one of the purposes of the United Nations that could trigger the exclusion clause.
"In his recent text, Professor Hathaway offers five possible interpretations of this particular exclusion clause. One of these, the fifth, presents an interpretation that conforms to the Minister's representation contention.
'Finally, it is argued that the clause disfranchises those who fail to respect any major initiative of the United Nations, including not only respect for human rights, but also such clause causes as the fight against hijacking and hostage-taking.'
"In the absence of case law on which to rely, it is open to us to accept this interpretation of the exclusion clause. To do so, however, would run counter to the suggestion in the
UNHCR Handbook
quoted above that it would be inferred that an individual, in order to have committed an act contrary to these principles, must have been in a position of power in a member state and instrumental to his state's infringing these principles.
"Professor Hathaway, in his concluding paragraph, seems to adopt the
UNHCR Handbook
position in this regard. While carrying considerable authority, these interpretations are not binding. We note that Article 1F(c) of the Convention does not stipulate that the acts that trigger this exclusion clause must have been committed outside the country of refuge as does Article 1F(b). If that had been the drafters' intention, we would have expected them to have said so. Nor is there any indication in the wording of the clause that the offender had to hold a position of power in his country's government.
"It seems to us that Article 1F(a) concerning a crime against peace, a war crime, a crime against humanity is more clearly directed to the abuse of authority than is 1F(c). We note as well the extremely tentative wording in the
UNHCR Handbook
, 'it could be inferred'. In our view, it is entirely reasonable to determine that someone who has committed a serious criminal act that is clearly against major initiatives of the United Nations is not worthy of the protection of the country of refuge in which he committed such an act.
"Do we have serious reasons for considering that this claimant has committed such an act? Yes. The claimant testified that he had pleaded guilty to charges of conspiracy to traffic narcotics and had been sentenced to three years in prison. [See footnote 1]"