[23]
On March 23, 2009, I granted a stay of removal pending the final disposition of this application for leave and judicial review. Information was provided to the Court with that motion going to the issue of irreparable harm that was not provided to the enforcement officer with the request to defer and which may have been of assistance to the officer. That information, and the basis for the stay being granted is set out in the endorsement, which reads as follows:
1. The Court is not impressed by some of the conduct of Mr. Williams since arriving in this country. In particular his surreptitious arrival in 1994 and the fact that he lived "underground" until he came to the attention of the immigration authorities as a result of being charged, and later convicted of credit card fraud and obstructing a police officer. However, it appears that he was given a conditional discharge and served the sentence - 60 hours of community service and 12 months probation.
2. One cannot help but be moved by the circumstances of his family. He married in 1994 and has two sons of that marriage, born in 1996 and 1998. The oldest is mentally delayed and suffers from serious allergies. His wife died suddenly in mid 2006. Through his Church he met and married his current spouse. She has three children from an earlier relationship. They are now aged 17, 11 and 6. The oldest has sickle cell anaemia and has periodic episodes that require hospitalization. The applicant and his spouse have one child of their marriage who was born in March 2007 and they are expecting their second child in July of this year. His current wife suffers from fainting spells, which cannot be diagnosed until after the birth, and has a heart murmur that is treated by aspirin. Her condition prevents her from working.
3. Mr. Williams operates a restaurant in Toronto which he apparently inherited from his deceased wife. He has four employees and asserts that as it is a cash business, he or his spouse must be on site.
4. Mr. Williams has an H&C application that has been outstanding for 15 [
sic
] months.
5. The enforcement officer considered and, in my mind, relied on information from an interview that Mr. Williams had with immigration authorities in October 2006. In particular, the officer references that in 2006, Mr. Williams said that if he was removed to Jamaica, he may chose to bring his two sons with him and that he and his children were living with his sister-in-law and her husband [
sic
]. What the officer does not mention in this regard is that this interview was given before Mr. Williams married his current spouse and that his circumstances have changed considerably since then. I am of the view that there is a serious issue raised as to the procedural fairness afforded Mr. Williams by the officer referring to and relying upon this dated information. I am further of the view that there is a serious issue raised in that the officer finds that there is insufficient evidence that Mr. Williams owns "The Jerk Spot". Again, the officer relies on the dated 2006 information and noted that Mr. Williams then said that the restaurant was "in trust" to him. No doubt because its owner, his former wife, had died. His entire analysis of the ability of Mr. Williams to place this restaurant in the hands of some third party for the financial support of his family is extremely questionable and, in my mind, unlikely to meet the reasonableness standard set out by the Supreme Court in
Dunsmuir
, even given the deference the officer's decision is due.
6. This is one of those rare instances where the harm occasioned by the removal of one parent is irreparable harm within the
Toth
test. The harm is the probable dissolution of the business, and the impact on the children and spouse at a time when many are in need of the applicant's emotional and physical support, in addition to his financial support. Additionally, while his criminal record is of his own making, it will probably result in him not being readmitted to Canada and reunited with his family should the application for judicial review of the refusal to defer be successful.
7. The balance of convenience tips in favour of the applicant in these very extraordinary circumstances.
8. The Court wishes to express to Mr. Williams that it expects him to remain honest and upstanding and to provide financial support to his extended family. But for his family's exceptional circumstances which rise to the level of irreparable harm, the serious issues raised in the officer's decision would not have kept him in Canada in light of his previous history.
Issues