[34]
The second category involves situations where there are factors that are not related to the travel arrangements but that are directly impacted by them. In this category are factors such as the impact on a child's school year where a child is being removed, the impact on a Canadian business where the person being removed operates a business, a pending birth or a death. In these cases, the deferral will be temporary in order to address or ameliorate the impact of the removal. The removal will be deferred to enable the child to finish the school year or to graduate, to enable the person to wind up or sell his business, to give birth to a child or to attend at the birth of a child, or to attend at a funeral. In some instances the relevant factor will have to relate directly to the person being removed. For example, if that person is a student it may be that a deferral to permit him or her to complete the school year is appropriate. That basis for deferral is less likely to be germane if the student is a child of the person subject to the removal order and the child will be remaining in Canada. In that case, absent special circumstances, the removal of the parent is not likely to have a material impact on the child's education. In other situations the relevant factor may not need to be one personal to the person being removed; it may be sufficient if it relates to an immediate family member or dependant. For example, the death of the spouse (who was to remain in Canada) of a person being removed may warrant a deferral in order that he can bury his spouse, make arrangement for the care of the children, or make arrangements for the disposition of the estate. On the other hand, if the person subject to the removal order has been estranged from his recently deceased former spouse and she has been more recently in a common-law relationship with another, it may be that a deferral is not justified. Accordingly, deferral in situations falling within this category will require judgment or discretion being exercised by the officer.