[13]
He decided not to grant the necessary authorization. I consider it important to set out his reasons in full:
"The applicant has provided a half page submission dated 07 July 2003, detailing the reasons that he should be authorized to return to Canada which include jobs waiting in Montreal for the applicant and spouse, as well as sufficient language skills to find jobs of their specialization that will benefit Canadian society. They are presently learning the English and French languages, so that they will become well rounded citizens. They intend to repay Canada with hard work in a country where there are no limits set for honest and hard working people.
"In balancing considerations of the applicant and sponsor with Canada's interest regarding the enforcement and integrity aspects of the Act and Regs, I have considered various factors which lead me to conclude that it is not in the national interest to authorize this return. I have taken into account the objectives of IRPA as well as recognizing the value of maintaining the integrity of the Immigration program within Canadian society and recognizing the mutual obligations of potential immigrants and Canadian society. There is little evidence of the applicant showing good faith in complying with immigration requirements during his 1 1/2 year stay in Canada while he pursued a refugee claim. His decision to remain until June 2002[sic]* was past the required date of departure and the present circumstances of requiring authority to return to Canada has arisen as a result of the applicant's decisions and actions.
"In my opinion, this applicant has demonstrated a clear and determined effort to remain in Canada by any means. I am satisfied that this applicant provided incorrect information in his application for a visitor visa to travel to Canada, given the short time that passed between the date of visa application and the date of his refugee claim in Canada. The failure of this refugee claim satisfies me that the claim was without merit and was likely economically motivated. I have also taken into consideration that the applicant's present ability to meet selection requirements for Quebec but am concerned that this eligibility was derived as a result of his remaining in Canada past the effective date of his departure order. The applicant's failure to pay for his own removal despite being gainfully employed from Aug 1999 to Jun 2000 and the fact that he would have produced evidence of a return ticket and funds on his visa application in Nov 1998 are factors which call into question the applicant's intent to comply with immigration requirements.
"I have taken into consideration that the [sic] both the applicant and spouse have siblings in Canada, however, I am not persuaded that these family connections would constitute a strong family reasons [sic] to authorize the applicant's return to Canada."
(* subsequently corrected to read June 2000.)
ISSUES