[9]
Counsel's third argument is that since falling within some of the paragraphs of s. 19(1) (i.e. paragraphs (c) to (g) and (j)) automatically excludes an applicant from the backlog class this means that the other paragraphs of s. 19(1) cannot be taken into account at a later stage, as grounds for refusing admission. I am not persuaded that this is so. Paragraphs (c) to (g) and (j) exclude from the backlog class those individuals who have been convicted of certain criminal offences or with respect to whom there are reasons to believe they are involved in or may commit certain criminal offences, including subversion, espionage and terrorism. It may seem an unusual and a redundant way of drafting legislation, to use certain requirements of s. 19(1) of the
Act
to exclude individuals from the class and other requirements thereof as grounds upon which an individual can be refused admission, at a later stage, but I am not persuaded that this excludes the latter from operating. The exclusions which define the class operate as of the date of the coming into force of the
Backlog Regulations
. They would not, for example, exclude individuals subsequently convicted of a criminal offence described in paragraph 19(1)(c) of the
Act
. The application of
Backlog Regulation
6(1), however, would exclude from admissibility for landing individuals who committed offences between the time they became members of the class and the time their application for landing was processed. Similarly, the requirements of s. 19(1)(a) and 19(1)(b) do not lead to an automatic exclusion as of the date the individual falls within the backlog class. Those requirements (medical admissibility and financial independence) are matters that can change over time. They were left for consideration by an immigration officer, in the normal way, at the time the application for landing is processed [see footnote 6]. Therefore, I do not see an inconsistency in having some aspects of s. 19(1) operate to define the backlog class and others having to be met at a later date, when the application for admission is processed.