[10]
Counsel argues that a member of the backlog class was, by the legislation, being equated to a person who had been granted refugee status after a full hearing (i.e. he states that medical inadmissibility and financial independence are not grounds for refusing landing). I have not been persuaded that this is the case. The backlog class is not equal to the class of persons who have obtained a positive determination on a refugee claim. An individual in the backlog class has demonstrated only a credible basis to his or her claim - there has been no inferences or conclusions drawn with regard to the essential elements of the claim [see footnote 7]. The backlog category was created to solve administrative problems which had arisen because of the large number of claims that were being received which the system could not process in a timely way. The creation of the backlog class was intended to allow individuals to apply for landing from within Canada. I am not persuaded it was intended to give those individuals a status similar to Convention refugees. I am further persuaded in this view on reading the Regulatory Impact Statement which accompanied the publication of the
Backlog Regulations
. That statement makes it abundantly clear that the requirements of paragraph 19(1)(b) of the
Act
were intended to apply to an application for landing made by a member of the backlog class:
"The Government's intervention is required to clear the backlog of refugee claims, which accumulated prior to the implementation of the new determination system, through an expedited process parallel to the new refugee determination system. In this way, it will be possible to protect the refugee determination system from becoming overwhelmed and thus ineffective in terms of meeting Canada's obligations to genuine refugees in a timely manner.
. . . . .
"In order to preserve the efficiency and effectiveness of the new determination system, particularly in the infancy of its implementation, claimants who are defined in the backlog population will have their cases considered under a process separate from the new determination system. ...
"
Where a credible basis for the refugee claim can be established, the claimant will be allowed to apply for landing from within Canada
.
To qualify
for landing,
the applicant must meet statutory requirements
(security, criminal,
health
)
and must not be dependent on public welfare assistance
. Those claimants who have a credible basis for their claims, but who are not eligible for landing for the foregoing reasons, will be referred for full hearings of their refugee claims before a panel of the Convention Refugee Determination Division of the Immigration and Refugee Board (IRB)." (underlining added)
Immigration Officer Or Adjudicator
To Make The Decision