[11]
Counsel for the applicant asserts that it was not for the immigration officer to make a decision as to whether the applicants fall within paragraph 19(1)(b), that only an adjudicator can make that decision. He relies for his argument on ss. 19(1)(b), 20(1), 23(3), (4), (7), 29(1) and 32(1)(3) of the
Act
.
"19(1) No person shall be granted admission who is a member of any of the following classes:
. . . . .
(b) persons who there are reasonable grounds to believe are or will be unable to support themselves ...
"20(1) Where an immigration officer is of the opinion that it would or may be contrary to this Act or the regulations to grant admission to a person examined by the officer or otherwise let that person come into Canada, the officer may detain or make an order to detain that person and shall
(a) subject to subs. (2), report that person in writing to a senior immigration officer ...
"23(3) Where a senior immigration officer does not let a person come into Canada pursuant to s. 22 and does not grant admission to or otherwise authorize the person to come into Canada pursuant to subss. (1) or (2), the officer may, subject to subss. (4) and (6),
(a) detain or make an order to detain the person; or
(b) release the person from detention subject to such terms and conditions as the officer deems appropriate ...
"23(4) In the cases described in subs. (3), the senior immigration officer shall
(a) subject to subs. (5), cause an inquiry to be held concerning the person ... as soon as is reasonably practicable ...
"23(7) Where a senior immigration officer causes an inquiry to be held concerning a person with respect to whom a report has been made pursuant to paragraph 20(1)(a), the officer shall make a copy of the report available to that person.
"29(1) An inquiry by an adjudicator shall be held in the presence of the person with respect to whom the inquiry is to be held wherever practicable.
"32(1) Where an adjudicator decides that a person who is the subject of an inquiry is a person described in s. 14(1) or a person who has a right to remain in Canada, the adjudicator shall let that person come into Canada or remain in Canada, as the case may be.
"32(3) Where an adjudicator decides that a person who is the subject of an inquiry is a person who, at the time of his examination, was seeking landing and that it would not be contrary to any provision of this Act or the regulations to grant landing to that person, the adjudicator shall
(a) grant landing to that person, in which case the adjudicator may impose terms and conditions of a prescribed nature; ..."