[17]
On April 30, 2003, the Court was informed by a motion from the respondent that a new decision had been made dated April 29, 2003, and been sent to the applicant. The letter, signed by Ms. Gignac's replacement, reads as follows:
[Translation] "Dear Madam:
This is further to the letters to you from this Department on December 11, 2001 and April 26, 2002, regarding the performance bond signed by you on October 1, 2001, in favour of Her Majesty the Queen in right of Canada to ensure compliance with the conditions imposed on release of your husband Alphonse Chemali.
In reviewing our file in this regard we realized that the amount we were claiming from you in our letter of December 11, 2001, should have been $120,000, not $60,000, for the following reasons.
On September 27, 2001, an adjudicator directed that your husband be released on certain conditions, including that you yourself, as you were solvent, deposit a performance bond for the Receiver General for Canada in the amount of $120,000.
On the same day, as you had a net worth of $177,000, you obtained your husband's release, signing the bond requested for $120,000.
In addition to the requirement of this undertaking, the conditions for this release, implementation of which you guaranteed, were the following: (1) that your husband present himself at the Complexe Guy-Favreau in Montréal at 9:00 a.m. on November 7, 2001, or at some other place, date and time, as requested by the Adjudication Division, for his investigation to be held and any continuance thereof; (2) that he
present himself at any place, date and time, if requested to do so by an Immigration officer, to arrange for his departure and removal from Canada
; (3) that he inform an Immigration officer forthwith of the address where he was going to reside and subsequently report in person any change in address to the Canada Immigration Centre closest to his residence before the address changed; (4) that he submit his Lebanese passport; (5) that he remain not less than 10 km from the Canada-U.S. border.
On November 7, 2001, after completing his investigation, the said adjudicator concluded that your husband was a person covered by subparagraph 19(1)(c.1)(I) of the
Immigration Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. I-2 (as amended), then in effect (hereinafter 'the
Act
'), and ordered that he be deported from Canada pursuant to subsection 32(6) idem. At that investigation your husband presented no defence to the allegations made against him of bank fraud in Lebanon totalling a little over U.S.$4.7 million. Further, the aforesaid removal order has not been set aside by a Superior Court.
On November 7, 2001, the adjudicator further reduced the amount of the bond required from you by half, [Translation] '
provided ... [you] suppl[y] a bond of $60,000
'. In addition to that bond the conditions imposed for releasing your husband were the following: (1) that he present himself,
at any place, date or time, if required to do so by an Immigration officer, to arrange for his departure and removal from Canada
; (2) that he inform an Immigration officer forthwith of the address where he was going to reside and subsequently report in person to the Canada Immigration Centre closest to his residence any change of address before the address changed; (3) that he submit his Lebanese passport; (4) that if he departed from Canada he confirm this with Immigration Canada
before leaving
. Apart from the reduction in the amount of the bond, only the last condition was new compared with the aforementioned order of September 27, 2001.
However, you signed nothing to guarantee implementation of this new condition. You did not undertake to pay the $60,000 as required by the adjudicator. Your husband nevertheless continued at liberty.
On November 15, 2001, he personally received a summons from an Immigration officer to present himself at Dorval Airport for his departure from Canada for Lebanon, scheduled for November 30, 2001, but he did not appear on that date.
The fact that you did not sign the suggested bond of $60,000 to replace that of October 1, 2001, does not cancel the latter, which stipulated that you should guarantee that Mr. Chemali would present himself,
if requested to do so by an Immigration officer, at any place, date and time, to arrange for his departure and removal from Canada
, and this was not done. Your undertaking regarding observance of this condition further indicated that your bond did not cease to apply when your husband's investigation concluded on November 7, 2001.
In the circumstances, the mere fact that he did not present himself at the airport as requested on November 30, 2001, to carry out his departure from Canada suffices to make you indebted to Her Majesty in the amount of $120,000 in capital, not $60,000 as mentioned in the letter we wrote to you on December 11, 2001. At that time we were wrongly of the opinion that as the adjudicator had reduced the amount of the bond to $60,000 your undertaking was limited to that amount.
Your arguments that you owe nothing to Her Majesty are incorrect for the following reasons.
You cannot be exempted from performing your obligations based on what is stated in section 6,
Withdrawals, Refunds and Forfeitures
, of Chapter EC8,
Cash Deposits and Performance Bonds, of the Immigration Manual - Enforcement and Control
of this Department, in effect at the relevant time, since those directions cannot apply in the case of a departure for a country not authorized by the Minister of Citizenship and Immigration.
Under subsection 52(1) of the
Act
, the Minister has the discretion to decide whether your husband could legally leave Canada for the U.S., but his decision in that regard was a negative one, since he required your husband to present himself at Dorval for his departure for Lebanon. The choice of that country was entirely legal, since paragraphs 52(2)(c) and (d) of the
Act
authorizes the Minister to deport your husband to the country of which he was a national or citizen or to the country of his birth.
In any case, the choice of the country of destination of an alien who is subject to a deportation order must always be approved by the Minister.
Further, a person such as your husband, who was being sought by the law enforcement authorities in his country, could not be authorized to leave Canada before the compulsory execution of the deportation order made against him and could not choose his country of destination. When the alien in question is a citizen of more than one country, as was the case with your husband in 2001, Canada can legally deport him to the country where he is sought by the law enforcement authorities unless he can show that there are good reasons for believing that he risks torture on return to that country, and this was not the case with your husband according to the decision by the Federal Court regarding him on November 30, 2001, a decision on his motion for a stay of the aforesaid deportation order (Court file No. IMM-5421-01).
In any case, the choice of Lebanon by the Minister as your husband's country of destination has never been set aside by a court.
Further, when a person subject to a deportation order leaves Canada voluntarily,
without being authorized to do so by the Minister
, the deportation order is deemed not to have been carried out.
Additionally, assuming that the remarks by the adjudicator and the Minister's representative at the investigation concerning your husband on November 7, 2001, indicated that he could legally carry out the deportation order made concerning him by leaving for the U.S. himself, those comments were made subject to your husband informing this Department of his departure
before leaving Canada
, which by your own admission in the letter you sent us on December 17, 2001, he did not do.
In any case, the adjudicator had no jurisdiction to authorize your husband to select his country of destination and you cannot legally rely against the Minister on the statements of one of his representatives which may have been contrary to the applicable law. At all events, eight days later, on November 15, 2001, your husband received a summons, as has been stated, to his departure at Dorval on November 30, 2001. On November 15, 2001, he had still not left Canada, and it was then quite clear that the Minister had not authorized him to leave for the U.S. by himself.
Of course, under section 104 of the
Act
your husband's failure to comply with a condition of his release does not automatically authorize the Minister to realize on your bond.
However, in the circumstances, including those set out in your letters to the Department on December 17, 2001, February 11, 2002, April 3, 2002, and May 14, 2002, we see no legal or humanitarian grounds for waiving the payment of the aforesaid amount of $120,000.
As regards the death of your husband in 2002, we have never received from you a certified copy of the original of any document certifying that event, so we cannot be certain of this. In any case, even assuming that your husband died and that he left you nothing, and that you are not the beneficiary of any insurance policy on his life, these facts could not constitute mitigating circumstances of a humanitarian nature since when you signed the bond you had a net worth of $177,000, that is, $57,000 more than the amount of your bond.
In
Canada v. Zhang
, [2001] 4 F.C. 173 (T.D., at 186) the Federal Court noted that 'the theory behind the requirement for ... a performance bond is that the person posting the bond ...
will be sufficiently at risk to take an interest in seeing that the release complies with the conditions of release including appearing for removal
'. Even if you did not have a financial obligation in this regard, which is denied, you have not established that you really did everything you could to urge your husband to leave for Lebanon rather than for the U.S.
For these reasons, you now owe the Canadian government the sum of $120,000, in addition to interest amounting to $3,751.43 as of March 31, 2003, on the $60,000 claimed in the letter we wrote you on December 11, 2001.
Your certified cheque, postal money order or bank money order made out to the Receiver General for Canada and having the number of the aforementioned file should be sent to the following address:
Citizenship and Immigration Canada
Accounting
300 Slater Street
Jean Edmonds Tower North, 4th Floor
Ottawa, Ontario K1A 1L1
Please return a copy of this letter with your payment.
If you still consider that the performance bond should not be paid or if you do not agree with the total amount claimed, please send us your comments in this regard within 30 days of receipt hereof.
Please return a copy of this letter with your comments, if applicable.
On expiry of the aforesaid thirty-day period, unless there is a favourable written decision by us releasing you from your undertaking, you will still owe the Canadian government the aforesaid amount of $120,000 and the aforementioned interest.
René D'Aoust
Director
CIC Montréal, Investigations and Removals
1010 ouest, rue St-Antoine, 2e étage
Montréal, Quebec H3C 1B2
c.c. your counsel, Jean-Michel Montbriand, by fax this date"
Compared to the letter from Ms. Gignac on April 26, 2002, that from René D'Aoust was in exhaustive detail and the amount claimed was no longer $60,000, but $120,000.