[2]
The facts relevant to this application are aptly summarized in the decision of Adjudicator Chodos. I am content for present purposes to reproduce his summary:
"The grievors were all employed with Health and Welfare Canada at the Whitehorse General Hospital prior to the transfer of that institution to the Whitehorse General Hospital Corporation. A complete list of the grievors is found as an appendix to this decision. The grievors contend the following:
'We the undersigned grieve that we have not been treated within the intent of the Workforce Adjustment Directive. We believe that the Department has privatized the Whitehorse General Hospital and that we should be guaranteed a position with the Department with salary protection if necessary in Whitehorse.'
"The material evidence in this matter is not in dispute, and is based almost entirely on documentation which was filed with the consent of both parties. There is also agreement that the issue in this case turns on whether, pursuant to the definition provisions of the Workforce Adjustment Directive, the actions taken in respect of the Whitehorse General Hospital constituted a 'privatization' as contended by the grievors, or a 'devolution', which is the employer's submission. There is no dispute that the Workforce Adjustment directive of December 15, 1991 applies to the grievors, and that this matter is presently before this adjudicator as a reference to adjudication pursuant to the National Joint Council bylaws.
"The Yukon Hospital Corporation and their bargaining agent were the subject of a decision of the Canada Labour Relations Board (CLRB/CCRT Decision no. 1107 dated February 21, 1995). The parties agreed that the following extract from pages 3 and 4 of that decision is an accurate and relevant summary of facts that are also pertinent to this case:
'The Whitehorse General Hospital was for many years operated by the Medical Services Branch of the Department of National Health and Welfare. The hospital serves not only the City of Whitehorse but also outlying communities in the Yukon. It is the only facility of its size and kind in the Yukon.
'Employees of the Whitehorse General Hospital were federal public servants. Most employees were represented by PSAC, and were included in one or other of the occupational family type bargaining units for which PSAC had been certified by the Public Service Staff Relations Board.
. . . . .
'On April 1, 1993, the Government of Canada, the Government of Yukon and the Yukon Hospital Corporation entered into a comprehensive agreement respecting the transfer of National Health and Welfare programs, services and facilities to the Government of Yukon, including the Whitehorse General Hospital. This agreement is known as the Whitehorse General Hospital Transfer Agreement. In the result, the Yukon Hospital Corporation assumed responsibility for the operation of the Whitehorse General Hospital. Also on April 1, 1993, the Government of Canada, the Government of Yukon and the Yukon Hospital Corporation entered into another agreement known as the Whitehorse General Hospital Bridging Agreement. The Bridging Agreement provided for the orderly transfer of the hospital's staff from the Public Service of Canada to the Yukon Hospital Corporation. The staff were to remain federal public servants until the termination date of the Bridging Agreement which was October 1, 1993, whereupon they became employees of the Yukon Hospital Corporation.'
"The documentary evidence submitted by the parties reveals the following additional information. In 1954 the federal government assumed responsibility for the delivery of health care to people residing in the Yukon through a division of the then Department of National Health and Welfare known as Northern Health Services; the government also undertook to construct what is now the Whitehorse General Hospital. A number of years later there were negotiations resulting in a 'Canada/Yukon/Council for Yukon Indians Health Transfer Framework Agreement' (Exhibit 8) which was signed in October, 1990. The objectives of this Agreement were described as follows:
'1.1	The objective is to achieve a complete transfer of the Medical Services Branch programs, services and facilities to create a unified health system for all Yukoners.
'1.2	Medical Services Branch Programs, services and facilities may be transferred to the Government of Yukon or to Yukon First Nations, as negotiated by the three parties.'
"This agreement was concluded on behalf of the Department of National Health and Welfare, the Government of the Yukon, and the Council for Yukon Indians, all of whom were signatories. Among other things the Agreement provided for 'the transfer of the Whitehorse General Hospital, including capital for a new facility, and the related administration and nurses accommodation owned by the Department of National Health and Welfare to the Government of Yukon' (paragraph 3.2). In 1989 the Legislature of the Yukon passed the
Hospital Act
(Statutes of the Yukon, 1989-90; c. 13). This
Act
established the Yukon Hospital Corporation, to be administered by a Board of Trustees appointed by the Commissioner and Executive Council pursuant to certain directions under s. 4(1) of the
Act
which establishes the representative nature, in respect of the local community, of the Board of Trustees. The
Hospital Act
provided that the Board of Trustees must submit any bylaws respecting the corporation for the approval of the Minister. Section 6 of the
Act
states that:
'The Minister may supply property and make grants and contributions to the Corporation to use in the pursuit of its objects and to other persons who operate a hospital with the Minister's approval.'
"Section 8(1) states that:
'The Corporation is not an institution of the Government of the Yukon and, except to the extent an agency relationship is created by contract with the Government, the Corporation is not an agent of the Government.'
"Section 17(1) states:
'Subject to any Act of parliament and limitations that the Government of Canada can impose, the Commissioner in Executive Council may make regulations respecting the transfer of programs, activities, personnel, and property from the Government of the Yukon or the Government of Canada to the Corporation and from any other person or group to the Corporation.'
"A complementary piece of legislation, the
Health Act
, was passed by the Yukon Legislature in December, 1990. It provides for the establishment of the Department of Health and Social Services, whose Minister is responsible, among other things, for the implementation and administration of several statutes, including the
Hospital Act
.
"Effective April 1993, two agreements were concluded between the Government of Canada, the Government of the Yukon and the Yukon Hospital Corporation. The first, which is referred to as the 'Transfer Agreement' provides for the transfer of the Whitehorse General Hospital. Section 3(l) of that Agreement states:
'On the Effective Date Canada agrees to transfer the responsibility for the delivery of the Whitehorse General Hospital Programs (appendix "C") to Yukon, and the Yukon agrees to accept this transfer.'
"Section (2)(c) states:
'Canada agrees to transfer to the administration and control of the Commissioner of the Yukon on or before the Effective Date, all lands described in Appendices "A" and "B" together with the buildings, facilities and any other structures thereon, subject to the approval of the Treasury Board of Canada and the Governor-in-Council.'
"This Agreement also provides that employees affected by the transfer will receive letters of offer of employment from the Corporation simultaneously upon the issue of letters of surplus by the Government of Canada. There is also a provision for the payment 'to the Yukon' of annual funding in the amount of six million, six hundred and ninety thousand, five hundred dollars ($6,690,500), as well as an undertaking that the Government of Canada will finance the construction of a new facility to replace the Whitehorse General Hospital at a cost not exceeding forty-nine million, three hundred and thirty-eight thousand dollars ($49,338,000). The companion agreement, referred to as the 'bridging agreement', establishes detailed provisions, in particular, concerning the transfer of staff to the Corporation. The preamble to this Agreement notes that the Corporation is responsible for the day-to-day operation of the hospital. On April 1, 1993 the Corporation issued letters of offer of employment to the grievors effective October 1, 1993. The letters of offer set out the Terms and Conditions of Employment as proposed by the Corporation. In various correspondence submitted to the employees, the Corporation noted that it is a separate entity from the Government of the Yukon with, among other things, its own pension plan. In one such document entitled 'Employee Info Letter # 1, Feb/Mar 93' it is noted that:
'... the corporation, truly "runs the show". ... Upon acceptance of your letter of offer and as of your appointment date, you will no longer be government employees. You will be employees of the Yukon Hospital Corporation! As stated in your letter of offer, your terms and conditions of employment are governed by the Memorandum of Understanding dated March 1991 for Whitehorse General Hospital, and by such policies and procedures currently in place or that may be put in place by the corporation.'
"In the same document under the subheading 'The Role of the Government of Yukon' it is stated:
'While the Yukon Hospital Corporation defines policy, ... it is the Government that defines the criteria by which health care in the Yukon is delivered. Government of Yukon prescribes methods of operations and standards of facilities and care. ... By submission to the Health Programs Branch or to the Minister, the Board can recommend expansion, deletion or modification of goals and resources.
'The Gov't of Yukon also provides a monitoring role and, through the Minister, presents to the Legislature the annual reports of the Corporation.'
"On October 28, 1993, the Yukon Hospital Corporation made an application pursuant to ss. 16, 19 and 47 of the
Canada Labour Code
for 'a declaration that one union is the exclusive bargaining agent for a unit of employees at Whitehorse General Hospital ...' (Exhibit 10). That is, the Corporation as employer sought to have a consolidation of the professional and nonprofessional bargaining units into one all encompassing bargaining unit. In its decision, supra, the Canada Labour Relations Board concluded, among other things, that s. 47 of the
Code
has no application to the Yukon Hospital Corporation. Section 47(1) of the
Code
provides as follows:
'47(1) Where the Governor in Council deletes the name of any portion of the public service of Canada specified from time to time in Part I or II of Schedule I to the Public Service Staff Relations Act and that portion of the public service of Canada is established as or becomes a part of a corporation to which this Part applies, or where a portion of the public service of Canada included in a portion of the public service of Canada so specified in Part I or II of Schedule I to that Act is severed from the portion in which it was included and established as or becomes a part of a corporation to which this Part applies, ... (
Reibin et al. v. Treasury Board (Health and Welfare Canada)
, May 10 1995 (Chodos), File 166-2-26035 (Public Service Staff Relations Board) [hereinafter Adjudicator's reasons], at 1-6.)'"
It is noteworthy that s. 47 of the
Canada Labour Code
, R.S.C. 1985, c. L-2, provides for the continuation of collective agreements or arbitral awards in the circumstances described in subsection (1).
2. The Adjudicator's Decision