[3]
Based on the facts set out above, Adjudicator Chodos concluded as follows:
"It is common ground between the parties that this case turns on the interpretation and application of the definition of 'privatization' and 'devolution' as found in the Workforce Adjustment Directive. Those terms are defined as follows:
'Privatization occurs where a department discontinues both responsibility for and delivery of an operation such that, simultaneously and by prior agreement with the department a private sector organization assumes delivery of that operation. Where an operation is transferred under these circumstances, the operation is deemed, for the purposes of this directive, to be discontinued, resulting in a work force adjustment situation;
'A devolution occurs where a departmental operation is either:
transferred from the Public Service to any other part of the federal government (such as another part of the Public Service of Canada, a Crown corporation or agency), to another level of government (such as provincial, territorial, regional or municipal), to a local airport authority, or to an aboriginal group (such as a band or tribal council), without any further responsibility on the part of the Public Service
or
is performed on behalf of the Public Service by one of the above entities.
'Where an operation is transferred or performed under these circumstances, the operation is deemed, for the purposes of this directive, to be discontinued, resulting in a work force adjustment situation;'
"It is clear from the evidence that the Yukon Hospital Corporation is a legal entity whose sole purpose is to pursue and promote a public objective on behalf of the Government of Yukon. I would note for example that there are three parties (Exhibit 2) to the transfer agreement including the Government of Yukon; the preamble states that 'WHEREAS the Yukon is ready and able to assume the administration of the Whitehorse General Hospital from Canada, and to provide hospital services to people of the Yukon'. Likewise, the bridging agreement provides that '... Canada, the Yukon and the Corporation have agreed to the Transfer of the Whitehorse General Hospital ... to the Yukon, pursuant to the Whitehorse General Hospital Transfer Agreement'. The enabling statute for the Yukon Hospital Corporation, that is the
Hospital Act
, also underlines that the Corporation is in almost all respects a creature of the Yukon Government which is intended to carry out a major responsibility of that Government, namely the provision of hospital care for the citizens of the Yukon. In my view s. 8(1) does not detract from this conclusion. While such a provision may have implications for s. 47 of the
Canada Labour Code
(see the CLRB decision, supra) that of itself doesn't necessarily imply that the Corporation is a 'private sector organization'. The
New Shorter Oxford English Dictionary
defines 'private sector' as 'the part of an economy, industry, etc., which is free from direct State control'. I would suggest that, where the State creates the corporation, provides most or all of its funding and appoints its managing body, that corporation is very much subject to direct State control.
"The fact that this entity has a separate legal personality does not override the overwhelming evidence that the Corporation is a public institution pursuing a public goal on behalf of government. Although it is true that the Corporation is governed, for collective bargaining purposes, by the
Canada Labour Code
, as opposed to the Yukon
Public Service Staff Relations Act
this of itself does not lead to the conclusion that the Corporation is a private sector organization. This country is replete with examples of corporate entities established by the federal government outside the Public Service proper and subject to the
Canada Labour Code
, which are notwithstanding considered to be public sector organizations, for instance the Canadian Broadcasting Corporation. In this respect, I would note that the definition of 'devolution', supra refers to 'a Crown corporation or agency' as examples of a transfer which constitutes a devolution as opposed to a privatization. Furthermore, the recipient organization in respect of a devolution is very broadly defined as including, among other things, municipalities, a local airport authority or an aboriginal group. Counsel for the bargaining agent acknowledged that the transfer in this instance can be only a privatization or devolution; given the several examples of recipient organizations under the definition of 'devolution', the definition of 'devolution' readily subsumes the Yukon Hospital Corporation and, in my view, is a much better 'fit' than the definition of 'privatization' which is the only other alternative.
"Accordingly, for the reasons noted above, I have no hesitation in concluding that the grievances should be denied." (Adjudicator's reasons, supra, at 9-10.)
3. Arguments