[5]
The applicants submit that a devolution occurs within the meaning of the Directive when a departmental operation is transferred from the Public Service to (1) any other part of the federal government (such as another part of the Public Service of Canada, a Crown corporation or agency), (2) another level of government (provincial, territorial, regional or municipal), (3) a local airport authority, or (4) to an aboriginal group (such as a band or tribal council), without any further responsibility on the part of the Public Service. In this instance, the applicants argue that the only way in which a devolution could have occurred would be if the operation of the Whitehorse General Hospital had been transferred to another level of government, i.e., to the Yukon Territorial Government. However, the applicants submit that the legislative framework surrounding the transfer shows that the operation of the Whitehorse General Hospital has been transferred to the Corporation, not to the Yukon Government. In support of this argument, the applicants note the following:
-	Section 8(1) of the
Hospital Act
, S.Y. 1989-90, c. 13 (hereinafter the
Act
), provides that the Corporation is not an institution or an agent (except to the extent an agency relationship is created by a contract with the Government) of the Government of the Yukon;
-	The
Financial Administration Act
, R.S.Y. 1986, c. 65, which normally applies as a matter of course to the Government of the Yukon, is the subject of a specific provision of the
Hospital Act
, which explicitly provides that this
Act
does not apply to the Corporation. Similarly, a provision of the
Hospital Act
also specifies that the
Human Rights Act
, R.S.Y. 1986, Supp., c. 11, applies to the Corporation. The inference drawn by the applicants is that explicit provisions are needed because the Corporation is not considered a part of the Yukon Government;
-	The agreements dealing with the transfer of the Whitehorse General Hospital recognize the Corporation as a distinct party with different obligations than the Yukon or Federal Governments; and
-	The employees of the Whitehorse General Hospital do not benefit from the protection of the Yukon
Public Service Staff Relations Act
, R.S.Y. 1986, c. 142, but are governed by the
Canada Labour Code
.
The applicants submit that, as these factors show that the operation of the Whitehorse General Hospital has been transferred to the Corporation and not to the Yukon Government, the transfer cannot be a devolution in the meaning of the Directive.