[13]
Thus, this court will accord, on judicial review, a high degree of deference to the decision of an adjudicator interpreting a provision of a collective agreement. However, if in arriving at an interpretation of a provision of a collective agreement, the adjudicator must interpret other legislation of general public interest other than its constituting statute, the court need accord no deference to this interpretation. This principle was set out by the Supreme Court of Canada in the decision of
McLeod et al. v. Egan et al.
, [1975] 1 S.C.R. 517; 2 N.R. 443, in which Laskin, C.J., stated at pp. 518-519 S.C.R.:
"... I wish to add for myself why I cannot accept the approach taken by the Ontario Court of Appeal, namely that there was an issue of construction and the construction adopted by the arbitrator was one which the language which he had to construe would reasonably bear. Although the issue before the arbitrator arose by virtue of a grievance under a collective agreement, it became necessary for him to go outside the collective agreement and to construe and apply a statute which was not a projection of the collective bargaining relations of the parties but a general public enactment of the superior provincial Legislature. On such a matter, there can be no policy of curial deference to the adjudication of an arbitrator, chosen by the parties or in accordance with their prescriptions, who interprets a document which is in language to which they have subscribed as a domestic charter to govern their relationship.
. . . . .
"... No doubt, a statute like a collective agreement or any other document may present difficulties of construction, may be ambiguous and may lend itself to two different constructions neither of which may be thought to be unreasonable. If that be the case, it nonetheless lies with the court, and ultimately with this court, to determine what meaning the statute should bear. That is not to say that an arbitrator, in the course of his duty, should refrain from construing a statute which is involved in the issues that have been brought before him. In my opinion, he must construe, but at the risk of having his construction set aside by a court as being wrong."