[14]
In its recent decision in
Canadian Broadcasting Corp. v. Canada Labour Relations Board
, [1995] 1 S.C.R. 157; 177 N.R. 1, the Supreme Court revisited the principle enunciated in
McLeod
. On this question, Iacobucci, J., speaking for three other members of the court, stated that:
"As a general rule, I accept the proposition that curial deference need not be shown to an administrative tribunal in its interpretation of a general public statute other than its constituting legislation, although I would leave open the possibility that, in cases where the external statute is linked to the tribunal's mandate and is frequently encountered by it, a measure of deference may be appropriate. However, this does not mean that every time an administrative tribunal encounters an external statute in the course of its determination, the decision as a whole becomes open to review on a standard of correctness. If that were the case, it would substantially expand the scope of reviewability of administrative decisions, and unjustifiably so. (...)
. . . . .
"While the Board may have to be correct in an isolated interpretation of external legislation, the standard of review of the decision as a whole, if that decision is otherwise within its jurisdiction, will be one of patent unreasonableness. Of course, the correctness of the interpretation of the external statute may affect the overall reasonableness of the decision. Whether this is the case will depend on the impact of the statutory provision on the outcome of the decision as a whole."
(
CBC
, supra, at 187-188 [S.C.R.]. L'Heureux-Dubé, J., Gonthier, J., concurring, held that an administrative tribunal protected by a full privative clause (such as the CLRB) is entitled to curial deference in its interpretation of an external statute, because the interpretation of an external statute cannot be characterized as a jurisdictional question for which correctness is required. McLachlin, J., dissenting, held that on a question outside the special competence of the Board (in this case, interpreting the
Broadcasting Act
and its regulatory regime), the standard of review applicable to the Board's decision was correctness. LaForest, J., and Sopinka, J., agreed with the result reached by Iacobucci, J., but did not specifically address this point.)
Iacobucci, J., concluded at pp. 191-192 [S.C.R.] that:
"... the proper standard to be applied to judicial review of the Board's decision that the appellant had committed an unfair labour practice is one of patent unreasonableness. The Board has the exclusive jurisdiction to determine whether there has been an unfair labour practice by the interference with the administration of a trade union or the representation of employees by that union, in contravention of s. 94(1)(a). This jurisdiction encompasses the authority to develop a test for when such interference is established, and to define the scope of the concepts of 'administration' of a union and 'representation' of employees. The fact that the employer in this case is a creation of, and is governed by, an external statute, does not raise the overall standard of review to one of correctness, even though no deference will be shown to the Board in its interpretation of the provisions of that statute. In this case the Board did not err in concluding that the existence of statutory obligations on the appellant was relevant to the issue of whether a compelling business justification existed for the appellant's actions. For the appellant to succeed, then, requires a finding that the ultimate decision that no such justification had been made out was an unreasonable one on the evidence before the Board."