[16]
The issue before the adjudicator, as identified in the applicants' grievance, was whether the transfer of the Whitehorse General Hospital and the administration of its programs was a privatization. The starting point to answer this question is to examine the Directive, and specifically, the definition of the term "privatization". The objectives of the Work Force Adjustment Directive are stated in the Directive as follows:
"It is the policy of the Treasury Board to minimize the impact of work force adjustment situations on indeterminate employees, primarily through ensuring that, wherever possible, alternative employment opportunities are provided to affected employees. It is, however, recognized that it is impracticable to guarantee the continuation of a specific position or job. The emphasis of this directive is, therefore, upon the concept of employment security rather than job security. To this end, every indeterminate employee whose services will no longer be required because of a work force adjustment will be guaranteed a reasonable job offer within the Public Service, subject to the provisions of the directive." (Aplicants' record, at 29.)
"Work force adjustment" is defined as:
"A situation that occurs when a deputy head decides that the services of one or more indeterminate employees will no longer be required beyond a specified date because of: a lack of work; the discontinuance of a function; a relocation in which the employee does not wish to relocate; a devolution, a privatization, or a contracting out situation. (Applicants' record, at 35.)"
"Privatization" is defined as occurring:
"... where a department discontinues both responsibility for and delivery of an operation such that, simultaneously and by prior agreement with the department, a private sector organization assumes delivery of that operation. Where an operation is transferred under these circumstances, the operation is deemed, for the purposes of this directive, to be discontinued, resulting in a work force adjustment situation. (Applicants' record, at 33. The french language text of the Directive defines 'privatisation' as follows:
Situation où un ministère cesse d'être responsable d'un service et d'en assurer l'exécution et où un organisme du secteur privé commence au même moment à assurer ce service en vertu d'une entente préalable avec le ministère. Lorsqu'un service est transféré dans ces conditions, il est réputé avoir été supprimé, au sens de la présente directive, ce qui entraîne un réaménagement des effectifs.)"
Paragraph 1.1.14 of the Directive provides that:
"Departments shall guarantee every affected or surplus employee who is both mobile and retrainable a reasonable job offer during the surplus period, and shall extend any such surplus period until at least one such offer has been made. Where practicable, a reasonable job offer shall be within the employee's headquarters area as defined in the Travel Policy. (Applicants' record, at 42.)"
Paragraph 6.1.1 of the Directive deals specifically with employees declared surplus as a result of a privatization. It states:
"Employees declared surplus as a result of a privatization are guaranteed an offer of appointment on an indeterminate basis to another position in the Public Service within their headquarters area, either at their current level or with salary protection, where necessary. (Applicants' record, at 65.)"