[15]
Addressing more specifically the grievances of the applicant, Mr. Latreille then wrote:
"Now I come to the critical issue of selecting the appropriate classification group for the new asset manager position: EG, ENG or PM. It is uncommon in the public service to have full-fledged professional engineering functions classified EG. This left only the ENG or PM groups to select from for the new 'forward looking' job descriptions. ENG is a group for which inclusion criteria is very specific while PM is a more generalist group where we find many types of senior management positions requiring a wide variety of qualifications. Throughout the public service, the PM group has been widely used to mix professional technical knowledge with senior management skills. Parks Canada cannot be faulted for following this path even though this particular combination may not have been common previously in the Agency. The Agency argues it also serves to reinforce equity at the local management table when most senior managers are at the same classification level or in the same classification group.
"The final point regarding the PM level is that Parks Canada is firm in its refusal to appoint you as a PM senior manager because you do not have engineering degree. Having found that the requirement for engineering degree is not unreasonable and within the right of senior management to impose, I cannot overturn the decision to not appoint you to the PM-6 level. This requirement for appointment is no different than many others imposed by the Agency in many circumstances and indeed it would be no different if the Agency had chosen to reclassify the position to ENG and for the same reasons denied your appointment. Let's not forget this new concept was intended to be 'forward looking'.
"This now brings me to consider the classification level and generic description you were given to reflect the work you have been doing until now, which is EG-07 Asset Operations Manager. I carefully examined the nature of your work, the scope of your mandate your managerial responsibilities, as well as the value of the assets (historical sites, infrastructures-building and such), in order to determine which elements were to be considered in the analysis and evaluation of the main trust of the work being performed. I find the generic job description fairly describes in generic terms your work and responsibilities. The evaluation summary further complements the description and the two together present a reasonable global picture of your duties. (...)
"Having reviewed the EG classification standard, I conclude that the point rating and result of EG-7 are appropriate and consistent with the EG point rating standard."
ISSUES