[11]
The applicant had the advice of counsel with respect to his request for a reconsideration. Part of the documentation filed for that purpose was an affidavit of the applicant which reads in part:
"24. I reviewed the Board decision and reasons several times. I believe that the Board panel erred in law in its determination of our cases in several respects. They refused my written representation concerning the interpretation and translation problems during the hearing (copy attached as Exhibit 7). They also disregarded four oral objections during the hearing with respect to the same matter. They attached no weight to the affidavit of Hassany Mohamed (Translation attached as Exhibit 5) and in doing so, disregarded this important evidence which was supported by other evidence. This other evidence included two pictures of damage in my car caused by the attempted killing (copy attached as Exhibit 6) and a letter from my nephew (copy attached as Exhibit 8) warning me [not] to go back to Egypt. Also, I believe that the Presiding Member misconstrued the positive duty upon him to ensure the adequacy of the interpretation by placing the onus upon me to establish my competence and fluency in both the English and Arabic languages before being entitled to raise a problem related to the interpretation. Numerous errors [in] translation and interpretation are noted in the affidavit of Shukrieh Merlet sworn September 16, 1992 (copy attached as Exhibit 9).
"25. In addition, documentary evidence corroborating my [sic] and my wife's testimony with respect to the persecution of academics and liberals by fundamentalists and religious authorities was filed by my counsel in Vancouver at the Immigration and Refugee Board Hearing and disregarded by the board members. Particularly, this evidence is:
(a)
Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 1990
, pages 1408, 1413, 1415, 1416 and 1417 (copy attached as Exhibit 10);
(b) an Amnesty International Report
Censoring the Mind
, at page 18, column 3, and page 19, column 1 (copy attached as Exhibit 11);
(c) an Amnesty International Report dated October 23, 1991,
Ten Years of Torture
at pages 12, 13 and 14 through 17 (copy attached as Exhibit 12); and
(d) an article from the December 6, 1991 edition of the
Globe and Mail
, International News (copy attached as Exhibit 13).
"26. I found myself in a very difficult position representing my family and myself, in seeking leave to appeal the Board decision in the Federal Court of Appeal. The facts related to this are set out in my affidavit sworn September 16, 1992, in Vancouver, British Columbia (copy attached as Exhibit 14). Notwithstanding that English is my second language and that I am not a lawyer, I did my best to learn the law quickly to exercise my rights in the Federal Court of Appeal. I believe that some matters that should have been dealt with has been overlooked or accidentally omitted in my first application for leave.
. . . . .
"31. I have been advised by Mr. Binavince and do believe that there are refugee cases in Canada in which the Federal Court decided that wilful blindness by a government towards violent acts by others is a form of state terror and that victims of these acts can be considered Convention Refugees. As this describes our situation, I obtained copies of three decisions in support of our case (copies attached as Exhibits 17, 18 and 19)."