[13]
The relevant portions of the Board's decision are:
"His complaint is that, as a critic and writer on religion and politics, he has angered the Muslim Brotherhood which he believes have sought to do him harm and damage his property, and from which he cannot obtain state protection. The claimant attributes all of his problems to the Muslim Brotherhood or its agents and to government complicity in allowing the Muslim Brotherhood to do whatever they wish to the claimant.
"Exhibit #8 warns the claimant 'not to write or publish anything that harms prayers or religion ... otherwise God's will will be done in killing you'. The claimant complied with the order and there is no evidence that he wrote or published anything after receiving this letter. He found this oppressive and objectionable. The threat is clearly an attempt to silence the claimant and to kill him only if he writes or publishes; he did neither.
. . . . .
"The documents indicate that there is no legal prohibition against religious conversion or proselytizing, but that Muslims face social pressure if they convert to another faith. The claimant has not converted to another faith and, even if he had, the consequences thereof would not amount to persecution.
"The documents indicate that the Muslim Brotherhood has been outlawed in Egypt for 37 years. President Mubarck has maintained this official ban on the Brotherhood but has generally allowed it to function as an opposition group. During the past ten years the Brotherhood has turned its attention to achieving legal status and the right to run in national elections. In 1987 it teamed up with the Labour party to run candidates in the election and 36 of it's [sic] members were elected to the National Assembly. The Brotherhood's purpose is to Islamicize Egyptian society by educating people in the ways of the Prophet and by ridding society of non-Muslim influences, specifically materialism, Communism, and Zionism. Most of the Brotherhood's energies are presently focused on Zionism. Six hundred Brotherhood members were arrested in May 1991 for protesting the Arab-Israeli peace talks. A leader of the Brotherhood who is also a member of the National Assembly has been arrested twice for crimes against the state. Exhibit #14
1
is a report which speaks of the arrest and detention of over 200 Islamists, mostly members of the Muslim Brotherhood. At pp. 642-643, exhibit #14 states that Egypt has long been opposed to extreme Muslim fundamentalism.
"
These arrests of Brotherhood members indicate that the Egyptian government continues to take action against the Brotherhood; the claimant's assertion that the government allows the Brotherhood to do whatever it wishes to him is not supported by the evidence.
In 1981, and twice in 1983, the claimant has reported incidents to the police. In the 1981 incident, the police refused to help the claimant; he then consulted a lawyer and discussed the possibility of a lawsuit against the police. In 1988, the police refused to make a report when he reported an incident to them. There is no evidence in any of these incidents of the claimant pursuing these matters with the police or other government officials. Obviously, he was aware of his right to initiate legal action against the police. There is insufficient evidence to conclude that Egyptian officials refused to aid the claimant. He sought and received the aid of the Egyptian ambassador to Algeria in June 1989. The ambassador agreed to speak to the Algerian authorities to ensure the safety of the claimant and his family.
"
The claimant insisted that he could not receive protection in Egypt because the government allowed the Muslim Brotherhood to do whatever they wished. This assertion is not supported by the documentary evidence.
The claimant did not seek the protection of Egypt after receiving threatening letters in June 1989; he did not report these threats to any authority. There is no credible evidence that the Egyptian authorities would refuse to protect the claimant. The Egyptian government has long been opposed to Islamic fundamentalism.
2
The evidence indicates that the Egyptian government arrests members of the Al-Jihad group. Exhibit #12 speaks of the arrest of eight members of Al Jihad in connection with the shooting death of Rifaat al-Mahgoub, the Speaker of the People's Assembly in October 1990.
1.
Human Rights Watch World Report
, 1992, p. 634.
2.
Exhibit #14
, pp. 642-643."
(Underlining added)