[15]
The
Country Reports on Human Rights Practices for 1990
, February 1991, Department of State, U.S., reads:
"The pattern of human rights abuses evidenced in 1989 was essentially undiminished in 1990; many basic rights remained significantly restricted. The primary problems continued to be torture of detainees and the Government's failure generally to investigate, try, and punish perpetrators of such abuses; the Emergency Law that permits prolonged detention without due process;
an increase in the use of lethal force against Islamic extremists
; and various restrictions on political activities, which interfere with the citizens' ability to change their government by democratic means. In addition to resorting to detention procedures contained in the ordinary criminal procedure code, the Government continued its use of Emergency Law authority -- currently in effect until 1991 -- to detain a wide variety of persons suspected of involvement in subversive activities, including the innocent relatives of such persons.
The number of political detainees is at least 1,000, including Islamic activists, their relatives, strikers, and minors.
Most were released after a brief period of detention.
Those most likely to suffer from human rights abuses are Muslim activists or extreme left wing groups
perceived to be a threat to the Government. ...
. . . . .
"... In response to an upsurge in violence from
extreme fundamentalist religious groups
, principally in upper Egypt, security forces shot dead 36 people during attempts to arrest demonstrators,
the majority from Islamic activist groups
, between February and August. Sixty-seven were killed in April alone. Among prominent political killings were those of Dr. Alaa' Mohiedden, a prominent figure
in the Islamic extremist group
, al-Gama'a al-Islamiya, in September and Speaker of the People's Assembly [unreadable] Mahgoub in October. Both killings remain unsolved, but Mahgoub's death was widely assumed to be the work of terrorists. In the case of Mohiedden, some observers attributed it to security forces while others speculated it may have been rivals within his own organization.
. . . . .
"... In early August state security forces, for example, detained a newspaper journalist for approximately 45 days
on suspicion that he was a member of an Islamic fundamentalist group
. Reports indicate that he was tortured repeatedly during his detention. In addition, although the State Prosecutor ordered that the journalist be examined by a doctor while in prison, no such examination took place. ...
. . . . .
"... The GDSSI and the other domestic intelligence agencies engage routinely in surveillance of opposition politicians, political or social activists, foreign diplomats, and suspected subversives. Employees of most government facilities, public sector factories, and foreign embassies assume that their activities are monitored by government informants.
. . . . .
"While the Constitution provides for freedom of speech and of the press and the Government has to a large extent refrained from curtailing political expression, restrictions do exist. Egyptians openly express their views without fear of retribution on a wide variety of political and social issues, sometimes airing vigorous criticism of the Government. Even in times of national emergency, as during the Persian Gulf crisis when Egyptian forces were being deployed to Saudi Arabia, critics of the regime's policies engaged in extensive debates of the issues.
. . . . .
"The Government influences the press in several ways. The State Security Prosecutor from time to time imposes bans on certain topics, in the past, such topics have included cases involving charges of corruption, the Egypt Revolution case, and political assassinations. The EOHR has claimed that the member of such bans has increased over recent years. Press content is also influenced by press guidance issued informally to the major dailies by senior officials such as the Information Minister about treatment of specific issues. This does not happen on a routine basis, usually the editors know the policy and are aware of the limits which they are expected to observe.
. . . . .
"Allegations of torture and mistreatment by government officials were aired extensively in the opposition press in 1990, and opposition press coverage of
the arrests of Islamic extremists and
public demonstrations was not censored.
. . . . .
"In May al-Axhar ordered
To Be or Not to Be
by Farag Foda, a well-known author and avowed secularist, confiscated and brought charges of blasphemy against him. An investigation was expected to be concluded in the near future. In some cases, at the request of al-Azhar, the Prosecutor General has initiated criminal court proceedings against the author. In March, following several articles criticizing
The Distance in a Man's Mind
in one of the national dailies, author Ala'a Hamid, his publisher, and the book printer were arrested and the book confiscated. Hamid was imprisoned on charges of blasphemy for 4½ months before being released on bail in early July. A verdict on the case is expected within the next few months. According to EOHR, Hamid is the first Egyptian to go to prison for his writings in the 20th century.
"The universities enjoy a considerable degree of academic freedom. In the past, faculty clubs at several universities, especially the universities of Alexandria and Assiut, have held political discussions which led to friction with the Minister of Interior and threats to dissolve the clubs. Faculty members are more likely to feel social pressure to conform than to experience any actual interference in their publications or research.
. . . . .
"... Street demonstrations, however, were banned on the grounds that they are a likely source of violent disturbances. Islamic organizations are permitted to organize public religious ceremonies, often attended by tens of thousands of people, on major holidays, but
persons regarded as Islamic radicals may still be denied permission to organize public assemblies
.
. . . . .
"According to the Constitution, Egypt is an Islamic state which provides for freedom of religious expression and equality before the law, regardless of religion. Egypt has a tradition of religious tolerance, and, with some notable exceptions, the authorities generally uphold the rights of religious minorities and the rights of individuals to practice their religion. In accordance with Islamic law, only Islam, Judaism, and Christianity are fully recognized as religions with laws, traditions and rites which must be respected. The overwhelming majority of Egyptians practice Sunni Islam or Coptic Christianity.
"Coptic Orthodox Christians, the most significant religious minority, may constitute 10 percent of the population, although their numbers are a subject of dispute.
"Coptic-Muslim relations deteriorated in 1990 with a sharp increase in incidents of sectarian violence above the level of 1989. During March, April and May
Islamic extremists attacked Copts and destroyed their property in several cities and villages in upper Egypt. Human rights activists as well as many Copts believe in some instances security forces were slow to protect Copts and their property and charge the Government with treating the Copts more harshly than Muslims
. In May security forces broke up a peaceful demonstration in Alexandria following the funeral of six slain Copts and arrested and detained 23 Copts for three weeks.
"While most Egyptian Jews emigrated in the 1950's and 1960's, those few who remain appear to practise their faith without restriction or harassment.
"Various Protestant denominations operate, some with significant Egyptian membership, while others have a small, largely expatriate following. Members of recognized religions may maintain links with coreligionists abroad. Other small religious groups continue to face difficulties.
"Christian missionaries who engaged in proselytizing Muslim Egyptians may be prosecuted under the penal code or under the broad terms of the Law of National Unity, even though missionary work is not specifically banned. This represents a major departure from the traditional Islamic practice in which proselytizing Muslims would be considered a capital offense. In May two Swiss and one German were deported after being charged with spreading Christianity and sectarian strife among Muslims and Copts. In September an Egyptian Christian was arrested for 'preaching and converting'. Conversion from Islam, while officially not restricted or penalized, is discouraged by the Government, and even more so by social pressure. In a number of cases involving converts from Islam, the security authorities have used the Emergency Law to arrest and detain converts, without bringing specific charges, on the grounds that converts threaten social peace and intercommunal relations. In September three converts were arrested by security forces; they are expected to be released in January 1991. Those who convert cannot have the religion category changed on their national identity cards or other legal documentation. All recognized faiths can, in principle, establish places of worship, run schools, and train enough clergy to serve believers. Synagogues and churches generally receive police protection. Under a law dating back to the Ottoman era, however, non-Muslims must obtain a series of permits culminating in a presidential decree to build or repair places of worship. While obtaining authorization is extremely difficult, the Government has permitted an average of 10 new churches to be built each year since 1982, in addition, it has issued an average of five permits for repairs or reconstruction during that same period.
"Egyptian law prohibits the use of places of worship to criticize the State. The courts have not yet ruled on a challenge to the constitutionality of this restriction. Although the Government maintains that sermons by Islamic and Coptic religious figures are not censored, Muslim prayer leaders are occasionally detained and questioned for delivering allegedly inflammatory sermons in their mosques. The Ministry of Religious Endowments has also been known to substitute its prayer leaders at mosques for preachers it regards as troublesome, as well as to take over the administration of some privately run mosques considered to be centres of antigovernment activity.
. . . . .
"Although the right exists theoretically, as a practical matter citizens do not have the ability to change the government by democratic means, and the political process remains significantly restricted. Since the 1952 Revolution, Egypt has had a political system characterized by a strong presidency. The dominant political party -- for many years the only party -- was an extension of the President's power and influence. Four former military officers, including Mubarak, have served as president in that period, but civilian government has become increasingly separated for military influence. Nasser ruled a one-party state, Sadat created an embryonic multiparty system, and President Mubarak has liberalized the political atmosphere by expanding somewhat the range of legal opposition activities. While Mubarak's National Democratic Party (NDP) dominates the political scene, there are now eight legal opposition parties which are allowed to organize, hold rallies, publish their views, and enter candidates for election to the People's Assembly, the Shura Council, and local councils. The Government permitted three very minor new parties to organize in 1990, but it refused to license a Nasserist Party on the grounds that it does not respect basic freedoms, and a Muslim Brotherhood Party on the ground that a party formed along religious lines would increase sectarian differences."
(Underlining added)