[16]
An article written by Sherif Hetata, entitled
Censoring the Mind
, the source of which is unclear from the record, states, in part:
. . . . .
"In Egypt, where books are concerned there is no censorship, officially, and there are no laws that permit censorship of books. And yet in fact there is a very cramping censorship where 'ideas' and 'thought' are concerned. This is especially the case in matter related to religion and philosophy, to women and relations between the sexes, to social values, and to the power and class system in control. Restrictions on 'free thought' are very severe, and writers live surrounded by 'taboos' buttressed by a traditionally powerful and centralized system which is known for its wide ramifications in all aspects of life. Behind this state system stand the religious authorities and the growing pressures of petro-dollar Islamic circles, or fundamentalist Islamic, or from Christian and Jewish movements.
"This powerless system is in control everywhere. The biggest publishing houses in Egypt are state owned and at their head have been placed men (never women) loyal to the system, carefully hand-picked and selected over the years to make sure that they have no 'impulses' of their own. So if you send a manuscript which is outside the prevailing 'lines of thought' or antagonistic to what are named our traditional values, or critical of the social system and its ideas and norms it will not be published. Besides, Al-Azhar is there to stop whatever may filter through, and the fundamentalist watchdogs have penetrated everywhere and keep clamouring for the blood of the most timid liberals. When Lousi Awad published a book entitled
Fikh El Logha
(
The Science of Language
) in which, among other things, he analyses the language of the Koran, the book was banned by Al Azhar because it could imply that the criteria, rules, laws, etc., of language apply to the Koran and that therefore the language used in the Koran is not miraculous, not divine. About two years or more ago attempts were made to ban
The Thousand and One Nights
.
"Privately owned publishing houses are small and few in number. They tend to follow a cautious policy. The bigger ones are mainly financed by influential circles linked to the Gulf Countries.
"Although there is no legal censorship the Law of Shame, promulgated under the late President Sadat, permits prosecution of all those who attack the 'fundamental values of our society', a very vague term which can end in deprivation of political rights. However since President Mubarak came to power, the law has not been used. Martial law still prevails and permits incarceration of individuals for a period of up to six months without trial, but so far this has only been utilised against political opponents but not against writers or independent intellectuals.
"Where the mass media are concerned the situation is even more serious. The most important newspapers and magazines are owned and controlled by the State. All those who occupy responsible positions, or supervise the various sections, or write columns, are part of the establishment, and very often linked by family relationships. If they do not toe the line they lose their jobs. That is what they keep telling me when my articles are rejected, which is usually the case. Or they will delete certain passages without consultation. Usually they are more papist than the Pope, for that is how fear operates in an autocratic system. Besides, they probably feel ill at ease with people who try to say what they think. ...
. . . . .
"As a result individuals, associations, literary, cultural and scientific institutions can only communicate their ideas through leaflets, pamphlets, and books addressed to their own members of circles. Members of the opposition or independent writers and thinkers who are critical of the system, its ideas, values and social practices are gradually driven out of circulation, literally silenced, or confined to a limited audience.
"Since President Mubarak took office things have improved slightly, but only very slightly. Fundamentally they remain the same. Either you are a part of the establishment with all its different components, including much of what is called the 'opposition', or you have to be satisfied with some remote corner in this system of controlled mass media. Either you defend prevalent ideas, values, and social practices and norms or you are banned from appearing, speaking and diffusing your ideas.
. . . . .
"In March 1988, officers from the Egyptian State Security Investigation Agency (SSIA) illegally raided the stores of Madbull publishers and confiscated all the copies of Reifa at Sayyed Ahmed's book,
Juhyman El Outiebee
(the Islamic fundamentalist who led a sit-in in the grand mosque in Mecca in 1979).
"Not only did the officers act illegally, since Egyptian law does not permit book confiscation let alone banning, but it was revealed that they acted on verbal directions from some clergy from Al Azhar (the state Islamic church) who had been contacted by the Saudi embassy in Cairo demanding the withdrawal of the book."
. . . . .