[19]
The Egyptian government's response to the charges that torture occurred reads in part:
"D. Egypt was the first Arab and African state to ratify the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights in 1982. It also participated in drafting the African Charter on Human and People's Rights, (which it ratified) on 3 April 1984, and acceded to the United Nations Convention against Torture on 25 June 1986.
"E. The Ministry of Justice is deemed the competent authority to respond to the explanatory decisions of the United Nations Committee against Torture. It is also responsible for the implementation of Articles 5 and 6 of the Torture Convention.
"F. It is certain that the allegations that some detainees have been subjected to torture have no basis in truth and are not supported by the facts. They are pure lies and rumours circulated with the intention of hindering security operations against some suspect elements. ...
. . . . .
"H. Certain individual excesses occur which do not amount to torture, in the true sense of the word. These are investigated by the authorities, and where instances are confirmed they are referred for trial. This does not in itself constitute a pattern, but rather limited lapses by police, such as happen in various countries of the world, in the course of apprehending criminals and the corrupt, as they strive to safeguard public order and security.
"I. Regarding the examples of alleged torture cited by Amnesty International we refer to the following: -
1. the treatment of prisoners is governed by Law no. 396 of 1956, regarding the Regulation of Prisons, and internal prison regulations;
2. there are no 'prisoners of conscience' in Egypt, since freedom of opinion and expression are guaranteed to all, within the limits of law;
3. the information contained in Amnesty International's report comes from correspondence or meetings with detainees belonging to extremist trends, which makes it unreliable and untrustworthy;
4. constitutional and legal protection against the ill-treatment or torture of prisoners demands recourse to the judiciary and justice; ..."