[20]
A newspaper report which appeared in the
Globe and Mail
(date unclear but appears to be December 6, 1991), entitled "A Modern Twist to a Muslim Message", forms part of the record. It reads:
"For an organization that has been outlawed for 37 years, the brotherhood appears remarkably healthy. ...
. . . . .
"President Hosni Mubarak has maintained an official ban on the brotherhood and prohibited its publications, but he has generally allowed it to function as an opposition group.
"In 1987, the group surprised Egyptians when it teamed up with the socialist Labour party in order to run candidates in that year's election under the Labour banner. Its success was also a surprise: 36 of its members were elected to the National Assembly.
. . . . .
"The brotherhood's principles remain what they always have been, to Islamicize Egyptian society by educating people in the ways of the Prophet and by ridding society of non-Muslim influences. Its enemies are the twin godless forces of materialism and communism, as well as the threat it says is posed by the 'Crusaders' (meaning Coptic Christians, whom the brotherhood views as a fifth column for the West) and by Zionism.
"At the moment, it is Zionism on which the brotherhood is focusing most of its attention. As the parties to the Arab-Israeli conflict gathered in Madrid a month ago, the brotherhood organized rallies and distributed leaflets protesting against the meeting.
"'The PLO has given up the fight', Mr. Hodaiby said, 'This is not a peace conference, it is surrender.'
"Distributing leaflets saying exactly that landed almost 600 members in Egyptian jails during the past month, 'You may be the last person I speak to", Mr. Hodaiby said during the course of an interview, 'I could be arrested tomorrow.'
"In addition to the recent flurry of peace-process criticism, the government also is disturbed by a new outburst of anti-Copt violence. On the eve of October's Africa Games in Cairo, Islamic militants burned two Coptic churches in the impoverished suburb of Imbaba.
"'We had nothing to do with those fires', Mr. Hodaiby insisted. 'The government accuses us of such things just so they can arrest our people.'
"Mr. Hodaiby draws a distinction between the Muslim Brotherhood and groups which espouse similar values but which would overthrow the government to achieve them.
"The brotherhood has 'never used violence', Mr. Hodaiby said. The groups that do 'are our biggest enemies, because they make people afraid of Islam'.
"'We do not want to form a religious government', he explained, pointing out that, unlike movements in Iran, the brotherhood has never had a religious man as its leader. 'We want Egypt to have a civil government that follows Sharla' (Islamic law).
"This outlook has done little to convince Egypt's President that the brotherhood should be legalized. ..."