[5]
No paragraph 3 appears in the Notice of Motion as filed. I presume it was omitted in error and, if included, would have related to costs. Paragraph 1 is narrower than the equivalent paragraph that was before the Associate Senior Prothonotary in that it makes no reference to damages. I was advised by counsel that this flows from a decision by or on behalf of the plaintiffs to pursue relief by way of recovery of profits rather than damages.
"- Grounds -
1. The Associate Senior Prothonotary erred in law and in principle in his determination that the applicatant for an order pursuant to rule 480 of the
Federal Court Rules
must establish that it will be 'unusually inconvenienced' if the order is not granted.
2. The Associate Senior Prothonotary erred in law and in principle by considering that the effect of the order of Mr. Justice Collier dated July 22, 1992 in this proceeding was to mandate that sales records be kept in any particular organizational fashion. Thus, the Associate Senior Prothonotary also erred in his determination that if Apotex complied with the order of Mr. Justice Collier, Apotex could produce its sales record without significant effort. Finally, the Associate Senior Prothonotary erred in law and principle by holding that if Apotex could produce its sales records without significant effort, an order under rule 480 should not issue.
3. The Associate Senior Prothonotary erred in law and in principle by allowing the plaintiffs, the Upjohn Company and Upjohn Inter-American Corporation ('Upjohn'), to file the Affidavit of K. Anne Marshall ('Marshall Affidavit') at the hearing of the motion without the consent of Apotex; such filing following the completion of the cross-examination of representatives [of] both Apotex and Upjohn.
4. The Associate Senior Prothonotary erred in law and in principle by allowing the statements contained in the Marshall Affidavit to impugn the credibility of Bernard Sherman because the issues raised in the Marshall Affidavit were not raised in the Affidavit of Bernard Sherman, nor where questions concerning these issues directed to Bernard Sherman in cross-examination, nor was Bernard Sherman given an opportunity to respond.
5. The Associate Senior Prothonotary erred in law and in principle by refusing, on the basis of no evidence, to exercise his discretion to make an order under rule 480 when there was no evidence presented as to any basis in law to refuse the relief sought."