[8]
Three cases that have been decided in the Federal Court of Appeal provide some guidance. The earlier two deal with applications under rule 480 while the latest deals with appeals from decisions of prothonotaries. The earliest is
Brouwer Turf Equipment Ltd. v. A. and M. Sod Supply Ltd.
, [1977] 1 F.C. 51; 13 N.R. 83. In that case, Jacket, C.J., stated at pp. 53 and 54:
"In dismissing the application, the learned trial judge said:
'In the absence of consent and of compelling reasons bearing on the conduct of the action as a whole, conventional procedures should be maintained.'
"I should be content to dismiss the appeal for the reasons given by the learned trial judge, which, in my view, succinctly and completely state why the application should have been dismissed.
"However, for such help as it may be in connection with the application of rule 480, I propose to discuss the argument put forward on behalf of the appellant. For that purpose, I think it is sufficient to refer to the foundation for that argument as set forth in para. 10 of the appellants memorandum, which reads:
Part III
Argument
10. It is respectfully submitted that the purpose of rule 480(b) and (c) is, inter alia, two-fold:
(i) to protect the integrity of the confidential financial affairs of the parties to an action until such time as such information must be disclosed in order to enable the court to fix a quantum of damages; and
(ii) to ensure that purely mechanical calculations do not unnecessarily engaged [sic] this Honourable Court at formal trial proceedings when such calculations can more easily be done before a Prothonotary or other officer.
It is respectfully submitted that on both accounts, the matter of the calculation of damages or an accounting of profits in this action, should be so referred.
"Dealing first with the 'purpose' of rule 480 as propounded by subparagraph (i) of paragraph 10, no authority is cited for the proposition that the rule is designed 'to protect the integrity of the confidential financial affairs of the parties ...' and I am of opinion that no such right to confidentiality can be implied in this rule, which was made pursuant to powers for making procedural rules. Insofar as a plaintiff at least is concerned, I am of opinion that it cannot be said that it is wrong for a trial judge to refuse an application under rule 480 when that application is based, as this application was, exclusively on a desire by the plaintiff to keep confidential as long as possible information pertinent to the establishment of his cause of action.
"With reference to the 'purpose' of rule 480 as propounded by subparagraph (ii) of paragraph 10, I am of the view that it is not put in proper perspective. Purely 'mechanical calculations' are not as such beneath the dignity of the trial judge. The real purpose of leaving the rule 480 class of matters to a reference, as I understand it, is to minimize the expense of an action. It is a matter of discretion in any particular action to forecast whether the most economical manner of conducting the action is to have the plaintiff prove his whole case in the first instance so that, if the plaintiff ultimately loses on the merits, the cost of establishing profits or losses will have been thrown away or whether such questions should be left until the substantive rights have been established in which event there may be the costs or two trials and two sets of appeals instead of the costs of one trial and one set of appeals. It is impossible to enumerate in a general way all the factors that, in a particular case, may or should be taken into account by the trial judge in reaching a conclusion on this question. In my view, however, within broad limits, it is a matter of discretion for the trial judge and his decision will not be set aside on appeal unless he has committed manifest error.
"What is clear, in my view, is that, as the learned trial judge has indicated the general principle is that the plaintiff must make out the whole of his case in the first instance; and, in the absence of consent or of 'reasons bearing on the conduct of the action as a whole', rule 480 should not be invoked to set that principle aside."