[17]
Henry, J., set out six principles to be applied in considering applications in relations to the Ontario rule. They are the following:
"(1) The decision to postpone disclosure of information and documents to a later stage, which inevitably postpones the consequential issue to a later stage and a further trial, is ultimately a matter of the discretion of the court having regard to all the circumstances.
"(2) The modern philosophy which is inherent in the new Rules of Civil Procedure is that there should be the fullest disclosure of information on all issues to be tried with a view to the speedy and efficient resolution of those issues at one time in one trial.
"(3) Postponement of production and discovery under rules 30.08 and 31.06 should be resorted to only the clearest of cases; full disclosure before trial is the norm and indeed, the prima facie right of both parties.
"(4) Where the threshold issue is not clearly severable from the consequential issue, in the sense that information sought to be withheld is not relevant to determination of the threshold issue, leave to divide discoveries and productions ought not to be granted since that could deprive the party of information necessary to establish or fortify its case; this is not a matter of discretion. In considering whether the information may become relevant only after the threshold issue is determined, the court ought to consider any possible relevance that the information sought to be withheld may have in determining the threshold issue, including questions of credibility.
"(5) Once the court concludes that the issues are severable within the sense described, the test to be applied is serious prejudice to the moving party; that is the only test prescribed by the rule where the threshold and consequential issues are severable. Determination of serious prejudice to the party is not a matter of discretion but is a finding of fact for the court to make. If the court is unable to find serious prejudice by immediate disclosure of the information, the rule does not permit disclosure to be postponed. If, on the other hand the court finds that serious prejudice to the party will result, the court must then consider how to exercise its discretion.
"(6) The decision to exercise the courts' discretion must then be made on the usual basis - judicially, in accordance with proper principles, on a case-by-case basis, accordingly to all the circumstances of the case."