[14]
The principal applicant did not leave the army until 1988 and then he did so because he wished to spend more time with his family. He had married in early 1988. He was given an honourable discharge in December of 1988 and remained a member of the army reserve. In the light of all this evidence, the panel concluded that although the principal applicant knew of the international offenses being committed he did not disassociate himself from the army at any time but accepted positions of higher responsibility. I quote some of the panel's conclusions in this regard:
"... He did not disassociate himself from the army at that time. On the contrary, the fact that he accepted positions of higher responsibility, like the training of members of the Atlacatl Battalion, the planning of operations or the command of units on the field, in the panel's view, means that the male claimant accepted the approach taken by the army, associated himself with the leaders of the armed forces and, by lending his technical knowledge and his energies, willingly cooperated in the organization and execution of operations, knowing that they could result in the commission of international crimes and that, in fact, sometimes resulted in such crimes being committed. From what the claimant stated at his hearing, he was a middle ranking officer, who had knowledge, experience and dedication to his work and, therefore, part of a limited group of people who made the army function.
"The panel took into consideration the fact that the army is not an organization 'principally directed to a limited, brutal purpose'. In fact, the panel believes that the Salvadoran army has a legitimate function in defending the country from aggression, be it internal or external. Therefore, mere membership in the army may not by necessity involve personal and knowing participation in persecutorial acts. However, given that the male claimant was involved in counter-insurgency operations, and particularly in the planning of those operations, and that the international crimes committed by the army were linked to counter-insurgency operations, and sometimes part of the strategy used in the execution of counter-insurgency operations, it is not possible to conclude that the male claimant was not an accomplice in the crimes committed by the army. Even if the claimant, as testified, did not hurt anyone with his own hands, the panel finds that, by embracing the goals of the army and by lending his effective support, he also accepted the darker aspects of the operations conducted by the army and became an accomplice in the international crimes committed by the army. ..." (footnotes omitted)