[16]
Counsel for the applicants argues that the panel erred because it did not assess whether or not the principal applicant would have been entitled to Convention refugee status had he not fallen into the category described in art. I(F) of the
Convention
. It is argued that such an assessment is necessary in order to deal with the dependent claim made by his wife. It is argued that this follows from the Court of Appeal decision in
Moreno
(supra). In that case the panel made no assessment of the dependent applicant's claim independent of the application of the exclusion to her husband. At pp. 26-29 the following statements are found:
"(E)
Did the Board err in law by failing to determine the male appellant's eligibility under the inclusion clause?
"Having concluded that this appellant's conduct does not provide a legal basis on which to invoke the exclusion clause, it is unnecessary for this court to address this fundamental question. Nor is it necessary to decide a corollary issue; whether the Board has the discretion to weigh the nature of the crimes against humanity with the fate awaiting a claimant who would have been declared a Convention refugee were it not for the application of the exclusion clause. One way of restating that question is as follows: Did the Board err by failing to weigh evidence favouring the application of the exclusion clause against that favouring inclusion? These questions will have to be addressed another day; see
Ramirez
, supra, but see
Canada v. Ugan Mehmet
, [1992] 2 F.C. 598 (C.A.), per Marceau, J.A., at pp. 607-608.
"It [sic] think it helpful to point out that it would have been preferable had the Board made a determination with respect to the appellant's refugee claim notwithstanding its decision to apply the exclusion clause. There are three reasons for this view.
"First, as a practical matter it is extremely difficult to separate the grounds on which a claimant bases his or her refugee claim from the circumstances which might give rise to the application of the exclusion clause. ...
"Second, in the event that the Board errs with respect to the application of the exclusion clause but has also ruled on the application of the inclusion clause, it may be unnecessary to refer the matter back to the Board. The same holds true if the Board rules on the inclusion clause, reaches a negative determination and dismisses the claim without turning to the exclusion criteria. Considerations of time and expense are always persuasive when establishing practical guidelines. I note that some panels of the Board have already recognized the benefits of making alternative rulings; see
Ramirez
, supra, and
Caballero v. M.E.I.
, unreported decision, May 13, 1993, F.C.A. No. A-266-91.
"Finally, aside from any practical considerations, it may well be that in certain cases the Board will be legally obligated to rule on the refugee claim irrespective of the applicability of the exclusion clause. That possibility arises in the context of spousal and dependent refugee claims and is discussed below.
. . . . .
"... The likelihood of the female appellant suffering persecution is not extinguished simply because the exclusion clause renders the male appellant ineligible for consideration."