[17]
It is important, then, in the present case, to set out exactly how the panel dealt with the wife's dependent claim:
"After considering all the evidence provided by the female claimant and by the male claimant, as well as the documentary evidence submitted at the hearing, the panel is not persuaded that the female claimant has a well-founded fear of persecution by reason of any of the grounds set out in the definition of Convention refugee, if she were to return to El Salvador.
"She declared that her fear of persecution is based on her political opinion and on her membership in a particular social group. She did not express a political opinion when in El Salvador. The evidence presented at the hearing does not indicate that the female claimant was attributed a political opinion because of her relationship with her husband. In the panel's opinion, there is no more than a mere possibility that this would happen in the future, in view of the peace agreement between the Salvadoran government and the guerillas, which has put an end to the armed confrontation and has decreased the tension between the two groups.
"The panel also considered whether the female claimant has a well-founded fear of persecution because of her membership in a particular social group, namely her marital relationship with the male claimant. She testified that she fears being persecuted in El Salvador by the army, by the members of guerilla groups and by the death squads.
"The panel finds that there is no serious possibility that the female claimant would be persecuted in El Salvador by the army. She had never expressed a political opinion opposing the government of El Salvador or done anything that would have given the army a reason to persecute her.
"As a reason for her fear of being persecuted by the army she quoted the fact that she is married to a former army officer, who was sought by the army after he had left El Salvador. The panel is willing to accept the testimony that telegrams received by the male claimant's grandparents ordered the male claimant to report to the army; the panel is also willing to accept the further testimony that members of the military visited the male claimant's grandparents' home to inquire about the male claimant and that once his grandfather was roughed up by the soldiers.
"However, the inference drawn by the male claimant, that he was sought for persecution, is based on speculation. Considering that he had been given an honourable discharge and that he had not experienced problems during his active service in the army and while residing in El Salvador after leaving the army, it seems more logical to believe that the male claimant was sought by the military because he was a member of the reserve and was under obligation to report for service when called. ...
. . . . .
"The fact that the female claimant was not contacted by the army while she was in El Salvador, at a time when her husband was allegedly sought by the military, is a further reason that that persuades the panel that there is not a reasonable chance that she would be persecuted in El Salvador by the military. She remained in El Salvador for five months after her husband left and was in El Salvador when the telegrams were sent to her husband's grandparents. She was not contacted, even though her address in Santa Tecla was listed in her husband's military records after they were married in March 1988. She left the address only about six weeks before departing from El Salvador in July 1989.
"Further, the panel is not persuaded that the female claimant has a well-founded fear of persecution at the hands of the guerillas. The evidence does not indicate that she was sought by the guerillas. It appears that the guerillas could have found her easily, considering her testimony that people in her neighbourhood knew that she was married to an army officer. Even though she moved to a new home after her marriage, in March 1988, the female claimant was not in hiding and continued to work at her usual place of employment. She testified that she moved to a different neighbourhood for about six weeks, though she did not quit her job.
"An additional reason for believing that the female claimant's fear is not well-founded is that a peace accord has been signed between the guerilla groups and the government of El Salvador, bringing the civil war to an end. The panel is persuaded that there is no serious possibility that the wife of a former military officer would be persecuted by the guerillas, at a time when the former combatants are collaborating in the peace process.
"The documentary evidence indicates that acts of violence continue to occur in El Salvador, though the cease-fire has not been broken and the pacification process continues, albeit at a slower pace than initially planned. At the present time, the documentary evidence leads the panel to believe that the change of circumstances in El Salvador is of substantial political significance and durable.
"Considering that the hostilities have ceased between the parties involved in the war, the chance that the female claimant might be persecuted because of her political opinion or because of her family relation with a former army officer, is in the realm of a mere possibility.
. . . . .
"For all the above reasons and after considering all the evidence, the panel determines that the female claimant does not have a well-founded fear of persecution by reason of any of the grounds enumerated in the definition of Convention refugee, if she were to return to El Salvador. Therefore, the panel determines that Hilda Lorena Canales de Penate is not a Convention refugee." (footnotes omitted)