[26]
It seems to me that if one says that evidence of changed country conditions cannot be taken into account unless the criteria set out in Professor Hathaway's book are met, then one is requiring the panel to first determine whether status would have been granted in the absence of changed conditions, had that determination been made at an earlier time, before circumstances changed, and then to determine whether there has nevertheless been a cessation of that status because of the changed circumstances. I do not think the CRDD panels need to engage in that type of conceptual analysis. I think it is sufficient for them to weigh the evidence of changed country conditions in the balance with all the other evidence before them in assessing an applicant's claim. As I have noted, I think the difference which it is alleged to exist between the decisions of the members of this court is more apparent than real. For example, when a panel is weighing changed country conditions together with all the evidence in a applicant's case, factors such as durability, effectiveness and substantiality are still relevant. The more durable the changes are demonstrated to be, the heavier they will weigh against granting the applicant's claim. In addition, if a panel has in fact made a determination that status would have existed but for changed circumstances (that is, if it has voluntary adopted that type of conceptual analysis) then a more rigorous assessment of the changed conditions following the criteria set out by Professor Hathaway will likely be appropriate. For the sake of clarity in this regard, I do think I should correct one misapprehension that exists in the reasons for judgment in
Mahmoud v. Minister of Employment and Immigration
(supra). Reference is made in that decision to the decision in
Villalta v. Canada (Solicitor General)
(1993), 68 F.T.R. 304 (T.D.). The decision of the CRDD panel which was under review in
Villalta
is described in
Mahmoud
as having been one which rejected the applicant's claim primarily because the country conditions had changed in El Salvador. That is not an entirely accurate description of that panel's decision. In the
Villalta
case, the panel's decision was equally based, as described in the
Villalta
reasons, on the finding that "even under the earlier conditions the applicant had really not been of great interest to the military". That is, the panel in
Villalta
took the evidence of the changed circumstances into account as one factor among many in weighing all the evidence before it.