[27]
I turn then to the jurisprudence. The starting point, in my view, seems to be
Mileva v. Ministre de l'Emploi et de l'Immigration
(1991), 129 N.R. 262; 15 Imm. L.R.(2d) 204 (F.C.A.). That decision dealt with whether a credible basis hearing panel could consider changed country conditions in deciding whether to refer the claim forward to the Refugee Division. The applicant was from Bulgaria and conditions in that country had changed between the date of her arrival in Canada and the date of the hearing. The court held that the panel was entitled to consider such evidence and set down criteria which it should apply in assessing that evidence. That aspect of the decision is no longer relevant since there is no longer a two stage procedure and, in any event, the present application does not relate to a credible basis hearing. Mr. Justice Pratte however, in considering the role of the panel, also considered the role of the Refugee Division itself. He wrote at p. 206:
"... The Refugee Division must accordingly take note of evidence relating to past or present facts affecting the claimant, his family and country of origin. Such evidence must be weighed by the Refugee Division in the same way as any other tribunal would do, taking into account its credibility and evidentiary force, and deciding what facts are established by that evidence. The Refugee Division must then decide whether the facts so proven are such that it can conclude that the claimant really runs the risk of being persecuted for reasons mentioned in the
Convention
if he returns to his country. ..."
Madame Justice Desjardins wrote at pp. 210-211:
"Subsection 46(3) of the
Immigration Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. I-2, is written in general terms. The political changes in the country of origin are, in my opinion, one of the essential components of the definition of the term 'Convention refugee' found in para. (b) of that definition, which incorporates by adoption subs. 2(2) of the
Act
. Before the first instance tribunal,
the claimant
, who certainly
is not unaware himself of changes taking place in his country of origin, has the burden of showing
, if there is evidence to the contrary, but even if there is not, that
the reasons which caused him to fear persecution have not ceased to exist
. He may also at this stage rely on subs. 2(3) of the
Act
, which provides:
'2(3) A person does not cease to be a Convention refugee by virtue of para. (2)(e) if the person establishes that there are compelling reasons arising out of any previous persecution for refusing to avail himself of the protection of the country that the person left, or outside of which the person remained, by reason of fear of persecution.'
"In short, the claimant must always establish that his fear is justified." (underlining added) (footnotes omitted)