[34]
The
Cuadra
case also dealt with a Board decision which the court found lacked sufficient explanation (pp. 2-3):
"The panel held that while the appellant had a subjective fear of persecution, the claim was not objectively well-founded. The principal consideration relating to the objective basis for the claim was the change of circumstances in Nicaragua and, in particular, the election of Chamarro [sic]. The panel pondered whether the continued presence of Ortega as chief of the military constituted a threat to former Contras which was knowingly tolerated by the new government. It found that, according to the documentary evidence, the Chamorro government was moving cautiously. However, this did not mean that the oppressive Sandinista regime remained. The panel conceded that the appellant received harsh treatment by his captors in July of 1990 and that the Sandinistas continued to play a role in the military and politics of Nicaragua. However, the Chamarro [sic] government had taken positive steps to reduce the influence of the Sandinistas. In the result, the claim lacked an objective basis.
"We have come to the conclusion that this decision of the Board cannot be allowed to stand. It contains too many conflicting conclusions to be satisfactory. The Tribunal, as mentioned above, found that the appellant was perfectly credible, so it accepted without any reservation that he was captured and mistreated by soldiers because of his prior involvement with the Contras. It simply reasoned that this did not provide a basis for a refugee claim as the 'claimant was a hapless victim of overzealousness by military forces'. Surely more detailed commentary was required. Could the Chamorro government put a curb on this 'overzealousness' given that Sandinista control of the military remained? Moreover, after affirming that the Sandinistas continued to play a role in the military and political scheme in Nicaragua, the tribunal found that a change in circumstances undermined the claim on the basis that 'the documentary evidence points to positive steps taken and progress made towards that objective [of diminishing the influence of the Sandinistas]'. Again, a more detailed analysis of the conflicting evidence in respect of a change in circumstances was necessary to meet the requirement that the change be meaningful and effective enough to render the genuine fear of the appellant unreasonable and hence without foundation.
1
1
See to the same effect:
Ali Ahmed and M.E.I.
, decision of July 14, 1993, unreported, File A-89-92."