[7]
In
Wang (L.) v. Minister of Employment and Immigration
, [1991] 2 F.C. 165; 121 N.R. 243 (F.C.A.), a memorandum and handwritten notes prepared by a visa officer of the interview were struck from the record because there was no supporting affidavit attesting to their veracity. The Court of Appeal wrote at pp. 170 - 171:
"... The respondent argues that, because of the inconvenience of arranging depositions by visa officers who, by definition, are outside Canada, the Court ought to accept their notes and memoranda as proof of the truth of their contents even though no affidavit averring to that truth is filed. In this, as in some of the other appeals dealt with serially, the visa officer concerned produced notes made during the interview and/or a memorandum made considerably later setting forth his recollection. ...
"I see no justification for deviating from evidentiary norms in these circumstances. No legal basis for acceding to the respondent's argument has been demonstrated and, in my opinion, it is devoid of a practical basis. In the first place, unless the error said to vitiate the decision appears on the face of the record, the intended immigrant also, by definition, outside Canada must depose to his or her evidence and, unlike the visa officer, may not be conveniently located to do so. There is no justice in according one witness to the proceeding an opportunity to present evidence in a manner that precludes it being tested by cross-examination. In the second place, the suggestion of administrative inconvenience seems flimsily based. Given that visa officers normally inhabit premises in which may be found other functionaries before whom affidavits acceptable in Canadian courts may be sworn, there seems no practical reason why his or her version of the truth cannot, with equal convenience, be produced in affidavit as in memorandum form. Finally, should a disappointed applicant wish to inconvenience a visa officer by a cross-examination there is the sanction that the right will have to be exercised, at least initially, at some considerable expense to the applicant."