[3]
On November 24, 2009, the Defendants' counsel wrote to the Court:
On Monday, November 23, 2009, on behalf of the Defendants, I wrote to counsel for the Plaintiff providing him with payment of his client's claim with interest and advising him that my client had instructed me to state on their behalf that he would pay the Plaintiff's taxable costs and disbursements either as agreed by the parties or on taxation by the Court.
The payment of the claim and agreement to pay the costs and disbursements of the Plaintiff obviates the need for a trial of this matter.
However, I just received an email from the counsel for the Plaintiff that the payment of the claim, which counsel took as a settlement offer which it was not, was rejected and that any other offers to settle were revoked. In addition, counsel advised that he was returning the payment cheque to me.
The payment cheque was for the sum of $1,800.00 and was calculated based on the sworn evidence of one of the Plaintiff's witnesses.
I urgently request a pre-trial conference to resolve the issue of proceeding to trial when the Defendants have paid the claim and have agreed to pay the Plaintiff's costs.
In my submission, proceeding on a two day trial when the claim has been paid is an improper use of the Court's time and expense.
The Plaintiff's counsel responded:
We have received a copy of the letter of today's date from Mr. Perrett to the Court. With the greatest of respect, Mr. Perrett is incorrect when he suggested that settlement of the Plaintiff's claim would obviate the necessity of a trial. The Defendants have an outstanding counter-claim and have commenced proceedings in the Supreme Court of British Columbia for a very substantial amount of damages based on the alleged wrongful arrest of the "MM Orca". Therefore, unless the Defendants are prepared to consent to a dismissal of the counter-claim as if after a trial on the merits, and to provide a Release of all claims in respect of the arrest of the "MM Orca", and particularly the claims commenced in the Supreme Court of British Columbia, the settlement of the Plaintiff's claim alone would not obviate the need for a trial.
Further to a pre-trial conference, the Court on November 30, 2009 granted a consent judgment of $1,800 against the Defendants, dismissed the Defendants' counterclaim as if after a trial on the merits and awarded the Plaintiff costs of the action and counterclaim at the middle of Column IV (the default provision under Rule 407 being Column III) of Tariff B payable forthwith.