[24]
There is no difference between counsel about the general principles for construing statutes in temporal terms. Reference was made to several leading authors on legislative interpretation [see footnote 1]. For our purposes it is sufficient to refer to Halsbury's Laws of England, vol. 44 (4th Ed. 1983), paragraphs 922 and 925, which include the following passages:
"The general rule is that all statutes, other than those which are merely declaratory, or which relate only to matters of procedure or of evidence, are prima facie prospective, and retrospective effect is not to be given to them unless, by express words or necessary implication, it appears that this was the intention of the legislature. Similarly, the courts will construe a provision as conferring power to act retrospectively only when clear words are used. (para. 922 at p. 570)
. . . . .
"The presumption against retrospection does not apply to legislation concerned merely with matters of procedure or of evidence; on the contrary, provisions of that nature are to be construed as retrospective unless there is a clear indication that such was not the intention of Parliament.
"Moreover, it is presumed that procedural statutes are intended to be fully retrospective in their operation, that is to say, are intended to apply not merely to future actions in respect of existing causes, but equally to proceedings instituted before their commencement.
. . . . .
"However, a procedural enactment will not be applied retrospectively without plain words if the effect would be to deprive a person of a vested right so that, for example, the right of a plaintiff to continue an action already begun was not affected by a subsequent statute imposing a period of limitation, whilst the applicability to pending proceedings of a provision altering the structure of appeals may depend on whether it increases or reduces rights of appeal.
. . . . .
"Provisions introducing new remedies have been classed with provisions as to procedure for the purposes of the rules relating to retrospective effect, so that they are prima facie applicable both to proceedings subsequently begun in respect of existing causes of action and to existing proceedings, whether pending before a court of first instance or an appellate tribunal, and provisions suspending remedies are probably to be regarded as procedural in character." (from para. 925 at p. 574)