[10]
Another decision, that of
Beno v. Létourneau et al.
, [1997] 2 F.C. 527; 212 N.R. 357 (F.C.A.), concerned an appeal from a Trial Division order prohibiting the Chairman of the Commission of Inquiry into the Deployment of Canadian Forces to Somalia from making any finding adverse to respondent Beno due to a reasonable apprehension of bias. In the course of the officer's testimony before the Commission, the Chairman had rejected that Beno would not "gain much by fiddling around". Shortly after, during a breakfast meeting at an officer's mess, the Chairman, according to an affidavit filed by a Brigadier-General, said that Beno had not given straight answers and perhaps was trying to deceive. In allowing the appeal, Isaac, C.J., Pratte and Stone, JJ.A., stated:
"[para. 29] It should first be observed that there is nothing, absolutely nothing, in the evidence that might suggest that the remark made by the Chairman on that day was inspired by something other than his own honest, although probably mistaken, perception of Beno's evidence.
The Chairman was clearly reacting to Beno's testimony; in the circumstances, his comment cannot reasonably be seen as indicating a tendency to decide on some basis other than the evidence
. ... More than a mere suspicion, or the reservations of a 'very sensitive or scrupulous conscience', is required to displace that presumption (see
Committee for Justice and Liberty et al. v. National Energy Board et al.
, [1978] 1 S.C.R. 369, at pages 394-395, per de Grandpré, J., dissenting).
"[para. 30] ...
It is entirely appropriate even for a trial judge to interject in order to clarify inconsistencies in the evidence
: see
Brouillard v. The Queen
, [1985] 1 S.C.R. 39, at pages 42-48;
Jones v. National Coal Board
, [1957] 2 All E.R. 155 (C.A.). ...
"[para. 31] The only reason why the Judge found the Chairman's remark on that day to be indicative of bias is that he disagreed with the Chairman's assessment of BGen Beno's demeanour and credibility. But that is not a valid reason to question the Chairman's impartiality. There is a difference between being impartial and being right.
The Chairman had to form an opinion on the evidence of the witness; he had to base that opinion on his own honest perception of things. It matters little, insofar as the allegation of bias is concerned, that he may have misunderstood the evidence or been less impressed than was the Judge by the candour of the witness
. It was, in our view, a gross error for the Judge to conclude that the events of January 30 gave rise to a suspicion that the Chairman was no impartial. The only reasonable inference that could be drawn from those events was that the Chairman had misunderstood the evidence and that he would, as he had said, look at the transcript before making up his mind." (Emphasis added)
Analysis