[14]
When in fact, what I said was:
p. 765
"Q. [Mr. MacINTOSH]: Do you agree with Hitler's views pertaining to mixing of races, for example interracial couples? What is your view on interracial couples, Mr. Zündel?
MR. CHRISTIE: Really, my lord, I have been fairly patient, but this is a bail hearing. I just heard the question: What is your view on interracial couples? What does that have to do with flight risk, a danger to the security of Canada or anything to do with bail? I am really struggling with this, and I object to it.
THE COURT: I take your point, but I think it is important to know where Mr. Zündel stands on it, because it is difficult to follow. It was a very straightforward question. ... I think the question is acceptable.
THE WITNESS: May I correct something here. It was published by Mr. Dietz in the United States. I did not prepare the book. It is not a book published by me. I supplied the pictures. ..."
p. 766
"THE COURT:
(A)
It is important to understand.
We are still sneaking around that
. Those are pictures provided by you and comments that are there. Remember what you said yesterday and today about your strong views and the way you don't want your views to be seen as different than they are. It is important to know whether you share those views because you put your name there.
THE WITNESS: He asked me about interracial couples. That was the question he posed."
p. 767
"THE COURT: Yes.
THE WITNESS: I haven't had a chance to answer it yet. I say that you can marry whomever you want. I married my wife. To me, the idea of interracial couple --
THE COURT: You disagree with the man who was co-operating with you in this book and you disagree with this comment about Adolf Hitler's comment. You are not sharing views of what Thomson is saying about that.
THE WITNESS: He asked for my racial views, but I don't know this blanket thing about Hitler's racial views. Mein Kampf, for instance, has 600 or 700 pages. Are you asking me about the party program and Hitler's idea on race in it or on --
THE COURT: Mr. Zündel, the title of this book is: 'The Hitler We Loved & Why'. We have more pictures than writing. With a picture you have three, four or five lines here and there to explain the pictures. 'We loved him because he kept our entertainment media free of the perversion of race-mixing and race-suicide'. You really don't need a picture for that. It is very clear."
p. 768
"My understanding is that Mr. Thomson, if it is no you, suggests that Mr. Hitler -- we don't have to have very subtle references to know that he was opposing a little bit what is mentioned as racing-mixing and race-suicide. Mr. Thomson said that.
The question was simple: whether you share those views or not. It is very simple. Your name is on the front page of the book. Now, if you don't share those views, tell us that you don't share those views.
This is a very simple question, but you are turning it around
.
THE WITNESS: In my own defence, before Mr. Christie got up to object, Mr. MacIntosh had asked me about Hitler and his view on race. Mr. Christie got up and said, 'This is a bail hearing'. I thought I was going to answer his question, but you have gone off to this book now.
Should we just leave the question unanswered?
THE COURT: Do you share those views? Yes or no?
THE WITNESS: No, I do not."
p. 769
"MR. CHRISTIE: My point, for the record, is that he should not be on trial for his views here or on the certificate. It is a bail hearing. It is inappropriate, and
he is not sneaking around
.
MR. MacINTOSH: In relation to whether or not bail should be granted, in my respectful submission, you are entitled to look at the totality of the evidence. As the Court said to both counsel when this process started, there would be evidence that would be called during both proceedings and that there would be an overlap. ...
THE COURT: ...
(B)
Also, for the record, when counsel rises and explains why and when it is cross-examination, I will tolerate objections with explanations and make a decision. There is no room for rising for the record to make comments. This is straightforward enough. There is no room for that kind of comment. This is a court room, and I
(p. 770)
try to give flexibility to everybody. This is a cross-examination with a lot of documents and a lot of evidence. I try to be fair to everybody and make sure that Mr. Zündel has his day or days in court to explain why detention should not be maintained. This is why we are here.
As was pointed out, we cannot look only at the detention question. There is an overlap - that is the word used - and I understand that. We try to do our best, and we have much more flexibility. It is a case where I have a specific obligation pursuant to the law, and this is what I am trying to do and very carefully. I try to play by the book."