[18]
My comment was rather:
p. 631
"Q. [MacINTOSH]: As a person who is well known in Canada, your testimony is that you have no control over what goes on and what comes off the Zundelsite. Is that right?
A. Ultimately I have no control.
THE COURT:
(C)
Could you explain what you mean by 'ultimately'. I don't want to be confused because this is something that is important.
I don't need that line of questions because you have been before me for four or five days. This is a web site. This is where your wife is controlling the password. There is some information that is getting on the site and you have no control. It is like you brought a book to your publisher and you knew what was written in the book and what was going to be published. On your television show and your radio show it is about the same. If you have something on your web site that is going totally against your views and your opinions, do you tolerate that and say. 'I have no control over the password, so she could say that I am stupid, I am the worst person in the world?' You would tolerate that, and you have no control over the password.
Do you think for a minute that I am going to believe that?
THE WITNESS: Let me explain to you the situation.
THE COURT:
Explain to me because the more we talk about it, the worse it is, in my opinion
. ..."
p. 633
"THE COURT: Yes, but a web site is just a way to transport somehow ideas and support for a piece of paper. When you watch television, you look at the screen. When you look at a web site, it is about the same as reading a book.
MR. CHRISTIE: Excuse me, I object.
THE COURT: You are objecting to ...?
MR. CHRISTIE: I am objecting. Le me state my objection.
You just said that a web site is like a book. My lord, do you realize that a web site can change three times a day, and a book does not? If your lordship is going to cross-examine this witness on the basis of assumptions of fact about web sites, then there should be somebody here to tell you that web sites change at a keystroke. Not a book, not a TV show, not a radio show, once they are produced, they are fixed. ..."
p. 634
"THE COURT: You are objecting to --
MR CHRISTIE: You just said a web site is like a book.
THE COURT: You can't really substantiate your objection about a couple of questions I am asking to clarify his position. I am just trying to understand. I don't think I will tolerate, unless you substantiate them, objections to a question that is not yet put to the witness. I think I am entitled to ask questions of witnesses.
MR. CHRISTIE: Absolutely, but -- ..."
p. 635
"THE COURT:
I don't want to harass you, Mr. Zündel. I am just trying to understand
.
On the web site there is
(p. 636)
information that is moving, maybe faster than a book or whatever, but I am trying to understand who controls that information and what is your knowledge -- ...
THE WITNESS:
I am glad that you are asking because I want to give you my picture of this mess
.
You said something about controlling the radio show a minute ago and producing a radio show and a TV show. When I did that, I was in control. ...
Nothing like that has ever happened on the web site. Everybody can fault me. I even fault myself for being fuzzy and loose about the web site. ..."