[19]
Furthermore:
p. 823
"MR. CHRISTIE:
(D)
...
You have also said that you did not believe Mr. Zündel, and said this repeatedly, in regard to control of the web site
.
This is a bail hearing. You have not heard the evidence of the owner of the web
(p. 824)
site, which you could hear. You have repeatedly referred to it as Mr. Zündel's web site.
Subsequently, you did say after a period of time that your comments about disbelieving him were 'not on everything', but that was not immediate. It appeared, and would appear to a reasonable person, that after consideration of the impact of your statement you decided to qualify it. I will be submitting that to a reasonable observer your statement regarding disbelief was far broader than the subsequent qualification
."
p. 660
"Q. [MacINTOSH]: ...
After the exchange with justice Blais where he asked you whether you were afraid of having someone putting documents on the site and his lordship said that he couldn't imagine and that he would have difficulty sleeping himself is someone was using his name on a computer, turning over to page 195, you said:
'I have tribulations, and his Lordship said, sometimes I don't fall asleep easily'
Q. Why?
A. Because she is a novelist sir. [Mr. Zündel's wife is a novelist]
If you have tribulations about your current wife putting material on your web site, that is all the more reason that you would have some input into the material that was put on there when you were not even married to the woman. Isn't that right, Mr. Zündel?
A. You are talking about ultimate responsibility. My legal advice was for the last eight years that, if I did not have the password, if I did not --
THE COURT: Excuse me, we are not asking
(p. 661)
about legal responsibility, about who is the owner of the site or whatever. This is about whether, when someone with strong views is using a web site, they share those views with you and you participate somehow. The question of ultimate responsibility or legal responsibility is something else. I think we are missing the point here.
THE WITNESS: Tribulations -- there were tribulations when my name was used on the site.
THE COURT: You mentioned tribulations. I was using another expression.
THE WITNESS: I illustrated that again this morning, with those names that appeared on the Zundelsite which captains at the jail brought to my attention. That is one of those not falling asleep easily situations. That is what I mean.
At the jail I was told not to reveal the name of the guards or any of the captains, and I did not. Yet, the captain comes to my cell and says there is this material giving the names. I said, 'Well, Captain, I don't see any computers. I will make inquiries'. I did make inquiries, and it turns out that it was something
(p. 662)
Mr. Fromm had written and my wife took it.
THE COURT:
(D)
Anyway, Mr. Zündel, the more we talk about it, the more I don't really believe what you say
.
If you have other questions, go ahead.
I am not talking about everything; I am talking about the last part of it. To arrive at a conclusion that you are right, I would have to come to the conclusion that you are not smart enough to keep any control on that web site. It is very difficult. So far, I am far from convinced by your arguments, far from it
. I think we should go to another line of questions."
p. 666
"MR. CHRISTIE: Is this really part of the Zundelsite, my lord? Has that been established?
THE COURT: This is a photocopy of a web site document. You have the note at the bottom.
MR. CHRISTIE: The bottom note does not identify the web address; it is partly obliterated. Is my friend prepared to swear or to put before this Court some evidence (a) that this
(p. 667)
comes from the Zundelsite? I haven't heard it. If this witness admits that it came from the Zundelsite or says he wrote it, that makes it relevant. Otherwise, I am questioning it; that is all.
THE COURT: You are questioning what? You are questioning whether this document is issued by printing what appears on the monitor one day on the Zundelsite? You are saying you don't have evidence of that?
MR. CHRISTIE: There is no evidence of that. To make it relevant, it is quite possible to ask this witness (a) if he wrote it or, alternatively, if he knows that it came from the Zundelsite. Before it can be used as some evidence, at least that should be established.
THE COURT: I think we know the answer.
MR. CHRISTIE: I don't.
THE COURT: Unless he qualifies himself as totally illiterate as far as you refer to the Zundelsite --
MR. CHRISTIE: He could say that he wrote it, but he should be asked.
THE COURT:
I already said a few
(p. 668)
minutes ago that I don't believe that he is that illiterate as far as this web site. This is the evidence that was presented to me, but it is my duty pursuant to this review to make findings from the evidence that is before me, pursuant to the evidence given by the witnesses and by the documents
.
I already said for the record that I don't believe everything I heard from the witness about this. This is my duty. Probably you are not very happy with that, but for this particular point I don't believe the witness
.
We could ask him about this, but I already know the answer because he said that this morning. You could ask any question about the site, and he doesn't know anything about it. He doesn't know how it works. This is the answer he already gave to me two months ago. He doesn't know how it works. He doesn't know how to push the buttons or the password; he doesn't know how it works. That is what he said.
Is my recollection correct?
THE WITNESS:
It is absolutely correct
.
THE COURT: So you are going
(p. 669)
to ask him whether this is a copy of what appeared on the monitor on the web site?
MR. CHRISTIE: No. Ask him if he wrote it. That is what would make it relevant. Otherwise, my friend should call some evidence as to where it came from.
THE COURT: I already know that. The answer will be: No, I didn't. He said that Ms Rimland was typing manuscripts for him. That is part of her job. That is what he has already said. He said that this morning and he said that before the two other tribunals.
MR. CHRISTIE: ... Is it evidence or is it not? It is not evidence if it didn't come from the Zundelsite. You have correctly identified at least his
(p. 670)
position, which you don't believe, that he does not control the Zundelsite and that he would not know if it came from the Zundelsite. You can disbelieve him, that's fine. ..."
p. 672
"THE COURT: ...
I take your point, but in your arguments at the end, Mr. Christie, you will
(p. 673)
probably say that I should not take this document into consideration. You should wait a bit before doing that. For this very moment, I think this document is acceptable as other documents are part of the evidence. It is obviously relevant. The question as to its real value and determinative value is another point for another day
.
MR. CHRISTIE: Thank you, my lord. ..."
p. 674
"THE COURT: Excuse me, before you go to your next question, I want to go back to the last document. ...
THE WITNESS: Right.
THE COURT: Have you done anything
(p. 675)
since that moment to get in contact with your wife to tell her about your frustration about that and that you disagree with this document? Do you disagree with the content of this document?
THE WITNESS: No. ...
. . . . .
THE WITNESS: You are asking me if I am totally against this content. I am not totally against ..."