[28]
The following are Mr. MacIntosh's submissions as to the motion for recusal:
p. 829
MR. MacINTOSH: In my respectful submission, you should not recuse yourself. This is any entirely specious allegation that has no reasonable basis in fact or in law. There is no reasonable apprehension of bias. A trial judge or any judge acting conscientiously and diligently is entitled to interject at proceedings to ask questions of witnesses in order to clarify matters that the judge is not certain about and that relate to evidence that has been presented before the Court.
These proceedings are extremely complicated proceedings under the
Immigration Act
(p. 830) relating to a danger to the security of Canada, whether or not Mr. Zündel is ultimately inadmissible. ...
I would note that in the materials that have been provided you have a decision of the Canadian Human Rights Tribunal in which the Tribunal made findings that Mr. Zündel was in control of the Zundelsite
. Obviously, that is not determinative in any way on you, but it is a factor that you can consider in framing questions to a witness, particularly when a witness is giving evidence that calls for a more complete explanation given the finding of the Tribunal and given the statements that the witness is making.
In my respectful opinion, the fact that you have said, as a preliminary matter, that you do not believe what a witness has to say on a particular point does not mean that you have decided that issue ultimately. It just means that you are alerting the witness to the fact that,
(p. 831)
based on what the witness is saying at that particular juncture, you have some doubts and that you want the witness to clarity based on what the witness' testimony has been
. That is entirely fair, in my respectful submission.
In relation to the comments pertaining to 'The Hitler We Loved & Why', I would point out that this is a bail hearing but, at the same time, in evaluating the strength of the case as to whether or not Mr. Zündel should be released, you have to make some sort of determination as to whether he poses a risk to the public or a danger to the security of Canada.
It has also been clear from the start of these proceedings, in my respectful submission, that evidence would be tendered not only in relation to the bail hearing, but in relation to the reasonableness of the certificate
. Therefore, there has been an intermixture of the material that has been presented and tendered.
To draw a strick demarcation, as my friend is doing, and to confine the issue simply to bail is a misreading of the statutory scheme
, in my respectful submission. ..."
p. 835
"I would submit that there is absolutely no basis whereby any reasonable person could conclude that there has been a reasonable apprehension of bias or that there is bias or that you have become partial. I don't think that, simply because you have asked some questions and expressed some preliminary views based on evidence that is evolving over a considerable period of time in what can only be described as a lengthy cross-examination, indicates that you have descended into the arena or lost impartiality."
p. 836
"... [M]y friend should not be trying to foreclose cross-examination of Mr. Zündel, which, in my respectful submission, he is attempting to do by this application today which has no basis in fact or law. ..."
p. 837
"... It would have been more beneficial had we had a transcript. Remarks also have to be looked at in context. In my respectful submission, he [Mr. Christie] has taken many of your remarks out of context." (Emphasis added)