[10]
In a letter dated February 19, 1996, counsel for the Commissioner responded as follows to the requests to produce documents:
"This letter and the attached constitute our response to the requests to produce documents in accordance with rule 1613 of the
Federal Court Rules
. You will note that we have provided our response to all of the requests in a single document bearing the title of proceedings directed in the Order of the Honourable Mr. Justice Richard dated February 2, 1996 and setting forth our response to the individual requests under the original court file numbers and parties who made the request.
"The evidentiary record before the Commissioner consists of 235 volumes of transcripts of evidence and 1235 exhibits, of which 440 are composed of one and one-half inch bound volumes of documents. It is clearly impractical to deliver the entire record, nor does any party appear to request same.
"In respect of the confidential written submissions which many of the applicants have requested be produced, we must regretfully advise that the Commissioner is not in a position to produce these documents. Following Mr. Cherniak's submissions to the court on February 2, 1996 in which he stated that this client was only interested in receiving those portions of the submissions which related to his client we undertook an inquiry to determine whether all of the applicants shared this position, with a view to determining if limited production could be made with the consent of the parties who delivered the submissions. Unfortunately, it immediately became apparent that the foregoing could not be accomplished as certain of the applicants, including the Attorney General of Canada and Mr. Cherniak's clients, required production of the full submissions. As the parties who delivered the written submissions are not prepared to waive the privileged and confidential basis upon which the submissions were delivered our client is not in a position to produce the requested documents."