[31]
Mr. Justice Décary of the Federal Court of Appeal explained the meaning of these two rules in
Terminaux Portuaires du Québec Inc. v. Conseil Canadien des relations du travail
(1993), 164 N.R. 60; 17 Admin. L.R.(2d) 16, at pp. 21-22 (F.C.A.):
"Because these are new rules, it will be useful to take some time to examine their real meaning in light of the actual terms used and their context.
"The obligation which is imposed on the tribunal by rule 1612 and 1613 is 'without delay' to 'provide' or 'forward' a 'certified copy' of 'material' which is 'in its possession' and which is 'specified'. In my view, this presumes that it is material which already exists at the time when the request to obtain the material is made, which the tribunal used in its hearing, deliberations or decision, which is part of its record and of which it is in a position to provide a certified copy. I simply cannot see anything in the words used that obliges the tribunal to busy itself preparing something it does not already have. The fact that the adverse party is not entitled to receive a copy of the material in question, even for the purpose of preparing an objection to it being obtained, also means that it can be presumed that it is aware of the existence and nature of the material in question, which it knows to be in the possession of the tribunal and which it may have in its own possession.
"Moreover, rule 1612 and 1613 must be read as an extension of rules 1606 to 1610, which relate to the preparation of the application record. Rule 1606(2) provides that the record shall contain, inter alia, a copy of each supporting affidavit 'including its documentary exhibits', a transcript of any cross-examination on the affidavit, the transcript of evidence and a description 'of any physical exhibits to be used by the applicant at the hearing'. Rule 1610 permits the court, where it considers that the records are inadequate, to order 'that other material be produced and filed'. It therefore seems to me that when rule 1612 permits a party to obtain 'material' in the possession of a federal board, commission or other tribunal, it does so in order to permit a party which is preparing its record under rule 1606 to include in that record material in the nature of the material listed in rule 1606, which is in the possession of the tribunal, which that party should have in its possession and which, for some reason, it has not had, does not yet have or no longer has in its possession. Thus it would be exceptional to apply under rule 1612, and this explains the unusual situation in which the adverse party finds itself: the fact that that party is at no time entitled to require that a certified copy of the material be forwarded to it too is not because the intention is to hide it from it - which would be unthinkable - but is simply because it is considered pointless to compel the tribunal to provide it with a copy which it likely has in its possession and which it will in any event find in the applicant's record if the applicant decides to reproduce it in its record.
"In short, rule 1612 and 1613 do not permit a party to ask the tribunal to prepare new documents or to do research in existing documents, any more than they permit a party to obtain existing documents from the tribunal which are in no way related to the impugned decision."