[17]
The Board's reasons for refusing the adjournment are set out at page 3 of its reasons for decision:
"The claimant chose to go without counsel and had a conference with a Refugee Protection Officer, who filled him in on the procedure and provided him with a disclosure package pertaining to his case.
"At his hearing, however, a lady by the name of Sophie Hanouessou [sic] turned up, stating that she represented a counsel, who is waiting for approval of legal aid but who would then represent the claimant. She also stated that the counsel had told her that the claimant, in his opinion, needs psychiatric treatment. She submitted no letter from counsel, nor did she provide a medical certificate. Since the claimant in his conference with the Refugee Protection Officer had already told the Board that he is prepared to proceed without counsel, and did not inform the Board subsequently that he would or was in the process of retaining a counsel, I decided to proceed with the hearing. I stated, however, that Ms. Hanouessou [sic] could act as counsel informally, asking questions of the claimant and also making submissions on his behalf. I also stated at the outset that though we were proceeding with the hearing I would evaluate the situation should the claimant's conduct make it necessary.
"However, the claimant understood all the questions that were put to him. He provided answers in a manner that suggested he had understood the questions and had no difficulty in answering them. There was no evidence at the hearing from the claimant's conduct, words or demeanour that he was unable to respond to questions or provide testimony, or that he did not understand the proceedings."
Further reasons are disclosed by the Board in the transcript of hearing (at pages 159-161 of the tribunal record):
"
By presiding member (to counsel)
:
[...] Now, we have had no indication so far from the evidence that the claimant has any health problems. The Personal Information Form has not been filled out very diligently, but this happens in many refugee cases. We have had the letter from the mother, from the other lady about the fear, but we have had nothing except your statement based on the opinion of the lawyer who has not informed us of anything about the claimant's need to see a mental health specialist. I should point out to you that even when we have persons under treatment and even if we have persons in the hospital, we have gone to the Royal Ottawa Hospital. We have gone to various hospitals and we have had hearings there. In all such cases, we take into consideration the state of mind of the claimant [...] Merely saying that a person is in need of a doctor does not qualify [...]
"
By presiding member (to RPO)
:
... [W]e don't know when this Legal Aid would be given. We don't know when he might be able to see a psychiatrist. I don't see any evidence here that tells me that we cannot proceed."
(e)
Board did not consider all relevant factors in deciding to deny an adjournment