[20]
The relevant statutory provisions for the purposes of the case at bar are all found in the
B.I.A.
They are as follows:
"5(3) The Superintendent shall, without limiting the authority conferred by subs. (2),
(a) receive applications for licences to act as trustees under this Act and issue licences to persons whose applications have been approved;
(b) [Repealed, 1992, c. 27, s. 5]
(c) where not otherwise provided for, require the deposit of one or more continuing guaranty bonds as security for the due accounting of all property received by trustees and for the due and faithful performance by them of their duties in the administration of estates to which they are appointed, in such amount as the Superintendent may determine, which amount may be increased or decreased as he may deem expedient, and the security shall be in a form satisfactory to the Superintendent and may be enforced by the Superintendent for the benefit of the creditors;
(d) [Repealed, 1992, c. 27, s. 5]
(e) from time to time make or cause to be made such inspection or investigation of estates as he may deem expedient and for the purpose of the inspection or investigation the Superintendent or any person appointed by him for the purpose shall have access to and the right to examine all books, records, documents and papers pertaining or relating to any estate;
(f) receive and keep a record of all complaints from any creditor or other person interested in any estate and make such specific investigations with regard to such complaints as the Superintendent may determine; and
(g) examine trustees' accounts of receipts and disbursements and final statements.
"14.01(1) The Superintendent, after making or causing to be made an investigation into the conduct of a trustee, may, where it is in the public interest to do so,
(a) cancel the licence of a trustee;
(b) suspend the licence of a trustee; or
(c) place such conditions or limitations on the licence of a trustee as the Superintendent considers appropriate.
"(2) The Superintendent may delegate by written instrument, on such terms and conditions as are therein specified, any or all of the Superintendent's powers, duties and functions under paragraphs (1)(a) to (c) or s. 14.02 or 14.03.
"(3) Where the Superintendent delegates in accordance with subs. (2), the Superintendent or the delegate shall
(a) where there is a delegation in relation to trustees generally, give written notice of the delegation to all trustees; and
(b) whether or not paragraph (a) applies, give written notice of the delegation of a power to any trustee who may be affected by the exercise of that power, either before the power is exercised or at the time the power is exercised.
"14.02(1) Where the Superintendent intends to exercise any of the powers set out in paragraphs 14.01(1)(a) to (c), the Superintendent shall send the trustee written notice of the powers that the Superintendent intends to exercise and the reasons therefor and afford the trustee a reasonable opportunity for a hearing.
"(2) At a hearing referred to in subs. (1), the Superintendent
(a) has the power to administer oaths;
(b) is not bound by any legal or technical rules of evidence in conducting the hearing;
(c) shall deal with the matters set out in the notice of the hearing as informally and expeditiously as the circumstances and a consideration of fairness permit; and
(d) shall cause a summary of any oral evidence to be made in writing.
"(3) The notice referred to in subs. (1) and, where applicable, the summary of oral evidence referred to in paragraph (2)(d), together with such documentary evidence as the Superintendent receives in evidence, form the record of the hearing.
"(4) The decision of the Superintendent after a hearing referred to in subs. (1), together with the reasons therefor, shall be given in writing to the trustee not later than 90 days after the conclusion of the hearing and may, where the Superintendent considers it in the public interest to do so, be made public after the decision has been given to the trustee.
"(5) A decision of the Superintendent given pursuant to subs. (4) is deemed to be a decision of a federal board, commission or other tribunal that may be reviewed and set aside pursuant to the Federal Court Act.
"14.03(1) The Superintendent may, for the protection of an estate in the circumstances referred to in subs. (2),
(a) direct any person to deal with the property of the estate described in the direction in accordance with the terms of the direction;
(b) direct any person to take such steps as the Superintendent may deem necessary to preserve the records of the estate; and
(c) direct a bank or other depository not to pay out funds on deposit to the credit of the estate except in accordance with the direction.
"(2) The circumstances in which the Superintendent is authorized to exercise the powers set out in subs. (1) are where
(a) an estate is left without a trustee by the death, removal or incapacity of the trustee;
(b) the Superintendent makes or causes to be made any investigation pursuant to paragraph 5(3)(e);
(c) the Superintendent exercises any of the powers set out in s. 14.01; or
(d) the fees referred to in s. 13.2(2) have not been paid in respect of the trustee's licence.
"(3) A direction given pursuant to subs. (1)
(a) shall state the statutory authority pursuant to which the direction is given;
(b) is binding on the person to whom it is given; and
(c) is, in favour of the person to whom it is given, conclusive proof of the facts set out therein.
"(4) A person who complies with a direction given pursuant to subs. (1) is not liable for any act done by the person only to comply with the direction."
Issues