[6]
It is important to understand how the financial statements at issue here came into the hands of the respondent. The evidence reveals that they record the Bands' holdings of three different sorts of funds: the Bands' capital moneys, which consist largely of royalties paid for oil and gas obtained on their lands; the Bands' revenue moneys, in which are included the interest on the capital accounts; and grants and contributions to the Bands made by the Department out of federal public funds. All three of these sources of funds are subject to reporting requirements by operation of the Indian Act and other related statutes and regulations. The pleadings set out the following outline of those requirements:
Written Submission of the Respondent:
"17. By definition, 'Indian moneys' means 'all moneys collected, received or held by Her Majesty for the use and benefit of Indians or bands' (Section 2 Indian Act).
"18. Section 61(1) of the Indian Act provides that 'Indian moneys shall be expended only for the benefit of the Indians or bands for whose use and benefit in common the moneys are received or held ... and ... the Governor-in-Council may determine whether any purpose for which Indian moneys are used or are to be used is for the use and benefit of the band'.
"19. Section 62 provides that 'all Indian moneys derived from the sale of surrendered lands or capital assets of a band shall be deemed to be capital moneys of the band, and all Indian moneys other than capital moneys shall be deemed to be revenue moneys of the band'."
Factum of the Applicant:
"5. Pursuant to the Indian Oil & Gas Act, royalties obtained from oil and gas development on Indian lands are paid to the Crown in trust for the Indian Bands concerned.
Indian Oil and Gas Act
S.C. 1974-75, c. 15, sec. 5
(in force April 22, 1977)
"6. The royalties thus obtained are treated by the Department of Indian and Northern Affairs as capital assets (as opposed to revenue generated from the use of land) and as such the funds from these royalties are placed in the individual Band's Capital Fund. The classification of oil and gas royalties as a capital asset is a matter of the Department's discretion.
Cross-Examination of Gerald Throndson,
page 5, line 1 to page 6, line 7,
page 10, lines 12-18
Affidavit of John Vleeming, para. 3-5"
Written Submission of the Respondent:
"20. Section 64 of the [Indian] Act sets out the specific purposes for which the Minister, with the consent of the Council of the Band may authorize and direct the expenditure of capital moneys of the Band.
"21. With respect to the revenue moneys of the Applicant Band, Section 69 of the Indian Act is operative: the Governor-in-Council has, by order, permitted the Band to control, manage, and expend in whole or in part its revenue moneys. This was done by means of the Indian Bands Revenue Moneys Regulations.
"23. The Indian Bands Revenue Moneys Regulations provide, inter alia, that the Band shall engage an auditor to audit its self-administered revenue account, and shall cause such report to 'be posted in conspicuous places on the Band Reserve for examination by members of the Band; and be supplied to the Minister of Indian Affairs and Northern Development'. The Band's financial statements which are in issue in this case were provided pursuant to this requirement of Section 8(2)(b).
"24. The interest earned on the Band's capital moneys is treated, by virtue of Section 62 of the Act as revenue money. The capital money as well as this revenue money is held in the Consolidated Revenue Fund until it is paid out.
"25. The Affidavit of Gerald Throndson, dated December 22, 1986, establishes that capital moneys, as defined by Section 62 of the Indian Act are held in the Consolidated Revenue Fund of Canada to the credit of a specific band (para. 3), that the Minister through his officials required the band to provide him with a Band Council Resolution requesting and consenting to release of the capital moneys, and an undertaking that an audited financial statement of the funds would be provided, (par. 5-9**) and that the band provided such Band Council Resolution for each of the year [sic] 1979-85, inclusive.
"29. With respect to 'contribution moneys', i.e., moneys received pursuant to an appropriation by Parliament, which are also included in the financial statements of the Band, Section 31 of the Financial Administration Act, and Treasury Board Minutes 763729 as amended by Treasury Board Minutes 793872 (Exhibits 'A' and 'B' to the Affidavit of Heather Peden), establish accounting requirements."
Written Argument of the Party Intervenant:
"The terms of the Contribution Agreements with the Applicant Band are that proper financial and accounting records be kept, that department officials have the right to access those records at all reasonable times and that the Band will provide audited financial reports. (Peden Transcripts, page 5, lines 7-23.)
"The information is used to assure the Department of Indian Affairs and Northern Development, and Parliament generally, that the public funds are expended in accordance with the program restrictions. (Peden Transcripts, page 11, lines 21-23, page 16, lines 10-24.)"