[12]
The respondent asks that the appeal be dismissed on the following grounds contained in paragraphs 3 to 7 inclusive in the reply:
"3. It is submitted that the hearing officer did not err in rejecting the opposition.
"4. It is submitted that the hearing officer did not err in declining to hold that respondent's trademark application fails to comply with the requirements of s. 29 of the Trade Marks Act.
"5. It is submitted that the hearing officer did not err in holding that the appellant had presented no evidence whatsoever to support the allegation that the respondent had not used its mark in association with the wares of the application since July 3, 1977.
"6. It is submitted that the hearing officer did not err in holding that there was no confusion between the respondent's trademark and the trade name of the appellant and that there had been no evidence of any use of the appellant's trade name in trading transactions.
"7.(a) It is submitted that the hearing officer did not err in holding that s. 9 of the Trade Marks Act has no application to the situation where the official marks of the appellant were given public notice by the Registrar after the date of respondent's adoption of its trademark.
"(b) It is further submitted that no issue of 'resemblance' arises under s. 9(1)(n)(iii) and s. 12(1)(e) in regard to an official mark except upon proof of the facts of:
(i) prior adoption, and
(ii) prior use
(iii) as an official mark for wares or services
(iv) by a public authority
together with a showing either that such official mark was not a trademark or that if a trademark, pursuant to s. 17(1) the use thereof was by the opponent or its predecessor in title and that the mark was not abandoned as of December 21, 1983.
"(c) It is further submitted that any use by the appellant of 'Olympian' as an official mark for the services of encouraging, stimulating interest in and participation in amateur sports is not such as to cause confusion with respondent's use of 'Olympian' for typeface fonts and records of typeface."
DECISION