[19]
In Insurance Corporation of British Columbia v. The Registrar of Trademarks (1979), 44 C.P.R.(2d) 1, Cattenach, J., at page 5, after reproducing s. 9 in its entirety, states:
"I do so being mindful that in all cases the intention of the Legislature must depend to a great extent upon the particular object of the statute, or in some instances a particular section within the statute, that has to be construed. Of course, that intention is to be determined as expressed by the words used but to understand those words it is material to know the subject matter with respect to which they are used and the object in view."
and he continues at page 13 and 14:
"Clearly s. 9(1)(n)(iii) contemplates the use of an official mark which a public authority has seen fit to adopt to be a use exclusive to that authority. The purpose of the Registrar giving public notice of the adoption and use of an official mark is to alert the public to that adoption as an official mark by the public authority to prevent infringement of that official mark. It does not, in my view, for the reasons previously expressed bestow upon the Registrar any supervisory functions.
"I fully realize the consequences. A public authority may enbark upon a venture of supplying wares and services to the public and in so doing adopt an official mark. Having done so then all other persons are precluded from using that mark and, as a result of doing so, on its own initiative, the public authority can appropriate unto itself the mark so adopted and used by it without restriction or control other than its own conscience and the ultimate will of the electorate expressed by the method available to it.
"That, in my opinion, is the intention of Parliament which follows from the language of s. 9 of the Act and that is the policy which Parliament, in its omnipotent wisdom, has seen fit to implement by legislation.
"I do not understand what right a court of justice has to entertain an opinion of a positive law upon any ground of political expediency. I think, when the meaning of a statute is plain and clear, the court has nothing to do with its policy or impolicy, its justice or injustice. The legislature is to decide upon political expediency and if it has made a law which is not politically expedient the proper way of disposing of that law is by an Act of the legislature, not by a decision of the court. If the meaning of the statute is plain and clear a court has nothing to do but to obey it - to administer the law as the court finds it. To do otherwise is to abandon the office of judge and to assume the province of legislation.
"If the true intention of Parliament was not as I have found it to be so expressed in s. 9 of the Trade Marks Act, then the remedy lies in Parliament to express its true intention in clear and unequivocal language."
To indicate the impact his decision might have, he states at page 16:
"From the documents on file in the Registrar's office transmitted to the court under s. 60 of the Trade Marks Act the Registrar was concerned with the effect the prohibition following upon the notification of the adoption and use of an official mark would have on trademarks registered in the normal manner with which the official mark conflicts. This particular issue is not before me but it appears evident to me that the normal commercial trademark registered by a trader must defer to the official mark adopted and used by a public authority or like body because that is the legislative intent. The remarks I have previously made that if the true intent of Parliament was not expressed by the language employed in the section or if Parliament should conclude that the law is not politically expedient then the remedies as before mentioned lie with Parliament."