[1]
Dubé, J.
: The appellant ("Molson") appeals under the provisions of ss. 56 and 59, of the
Trade Marks Act
, R.S.C. 1985, c. T-13, from the decision of the Chairman, Trademarks Opposition Board ("the Registrar") dated April 30, 1990, rejecting Molson's opposition to the application (No. 529,080) for registration of the trademark "Ricard & Design" filed by the respondent ("Pernod Ricard"), a representation of which appears below.
[See printed version]
[2]
Pernod Ricard filed an application on September 26, 1984, for the trademark aforementioned for use in association with "vins, apértifs à base d'anis, spiritueux anisés, boissons alcooliques à base d'anis". The application was based upon use in Canada since 1954. On January 11, 1986, the trademark was advertised in the
Trade Marks Journal
. On April 23, 1986, Molson filed a statement of opposition on several grounds including the grounds that Pernod Ricard has not used the trademark in Canada since 1954; that the trademark is the surname of an individual who is living or has died within the preceding thirty years; and that the trademark is not distinctive within the meaning of s. 2 of the
Act
.
[3]
There followed the filing of a counterstatement to the opposition by Pernod Ricard, the filing of affidavit evidence by Molson, cross-examinations upon the affidavits, amendments to the application (claiming use since 1954 by Pernod Ricard and its predecessors in title) and to the statement of opposition by Molson. After an oral hearing, the Registrar rejected the opposition of Molson.
[4]
The Registrar rejected all the grounds of opposition of Molson for the following reasons, reduced for purposes of brevity as follows:
a) The first ground of opposition was rejected on the basis that Molson did not adduce sufficient admissible evidence to discharge its evidential burden to establish that the respondent or the respondent's predecessor in title had not used the trademark "Ricard & Design" since 1954 or at all;
b) The second ground of opposition was rejected because there is sufficient subject matter in the trademark "Ricard & Design", apart from the name Ricard, to warrant registration as a trademark;
c) The third ground of opposition was rejected because Molson failed to meet the evidential burden to establish that the respondent's trademark "Ricard & Design", when considered in its entirety, is nondistinctive.
[5]
By way of a notice of appeal dated June 28, 1990, Molson appealed the decision of the Registrar on the following grounds, as appear from paragraph 18 of the notice of appeal:
"i) the Registrar erred in fact and in law in holding that the opponent had failed to meet the evidential burden imposed by s. 30 of the
Act
;
"ii) the Registrar erred in fact and in law in holding that s. 30(b) of the
Act
could not be construed as raising the issue of abandonment as a basis for refusing the applicant's application;
"iii) the Registrar erred in fact and in law in failing to consider a s. 30 issue, being abandonment, where an inaccuracy or ambiguity in the applicant's application or where the applicant's own evidence points to noncompliance with s. 30 of the
Act
;
"iv) the Registrar erred in fact and in law in view of s. 12(1)(a) of the
Act
in holding that the design features of the applicant's trademark exist separate and apart from the word 'Ricard', possessing a surname significance, and are such as to constitute a registerable trademark;
"v) the Registrar erred in fact and in law in holding that the opponent has not met the evidential burden upon it to demonstrate that the applicant's trademark when considered in its entirety is nondistinctive;
"vi) the Registrar erred in law in rejecting the appellant's opposition to application no. 529,080 for all the reasons enumerated above in paragraphs 18(i) to (v) inclusive."
[6]
It is to be noted that subparagraph (iv) with reference to surname significance was dropped by Molson at the hearing.
[7]
Under the provisions of s. 56(5) of the
Act
, Molson filed as additional evidence for this appeal three statutory declarations of John Koh, a law student employed by solicitors of Molson, such affidavits being merely vehicles for the introduction of the affidavits and the cross-examinations of Mark L. Nougayrol filed in opposition proceedings taken by Pernod Ricard to an earlier application (No. 510,763) by Molson for the registration of the trademark "Ricard's Red".
[8]
Mr. Nougayrol is the representative of the Société pour l'exportation de grandes marques (S.E.G.M.), and a person duly authorized to manage the operations of Pernod Ricard in Canada. In his evidence, Mr. Nougayrol acknowledged that Pernod Ricard is a French corporation which was formed in 1974 from the merger of two French corporations, Ricard and Pernod, and that the new entity became the owner of all of the trademarks of the two merged corporations. Also, that S.E.G.M. is a French corporation formed in 1975, which is a wholly owned subsidiary of Pernod Ricard and is the exclusive worldwide licensee of the trademarks of Pernod Ricard; that S.E.G.M. has been the agent for Pernod Ricard doing business in Canada since 1975 and that Meagher Distillery Limited has acted as an agent in Canada for Pernod Ricard products since at least 1980.
[9]
Pernod Ricard did not file any evidence under s. 56(5) of the
Act
for the purposes of the instant appeal.
[10]
I shall now deal with the first ground of appeal of Molson, namely noncompliance with s. 30(b) of the
Act
. Section 30 of the
Act
prescribes nine particulars which must form the contents of an application for the registration of a trademark. Section 30(b) stipulates that the applicant shall file, in the case of a trademark that has been used in Canada, the date from which the applicant
or his named predecessors in title, if any
, have so used the trademark.
[11]
Molson argues that in order to establish a date of use in Canada prior to the actual use by the applicant, the latter must provide a list of all predecessors in title covering the time from the date of first use to the present and such use must be by the applicant itself, or a predecessor in title, but not by a person authorized to employ the mark (
David Crystal Inc. and Izod v. La Chemise Lacoste
(1973), 22 C.P.R.(2d) 78;
Molson Cos. Ltd. v. Rola Weinbrennerei and Likorfabrik GmbH & Co. KG
(1988), 23 C.P.R.(3d) 197 (T.M.O.B.), and
Marineland Inc. v. Marine Wonderland and Animal Park Ltd.
(1974), 16 C.P.R.(2d) 97 (F.C.T.D.)). However, according to the evidence of Mr. Nougayrol aforementioned, albeit in other proceedings, S.E.G.M. is a wholly owned subsidiary of Pernod Ricard. It was created in 1975 and is the exclusive worldwide licensee of all the leading marks of Pernod Ricard outside France. And, Pernod Ricard was formed in 1974 from the merger of Pernod & Ricard. Therefore, it is impossible for S.E.G.M. to have been a predecessor in title of Pernod Ricard. Hence, the latter has made a false assertion and a breach of s. 30(b) of the
Act
. Such a misrepresentation renders a registered trademark invalid on the basis that the mark was not registrable at the date of registration.
[12]
Molson argues that it has long been the practice of the Registrar to refuse an application pursuant to s. 30(b) when, even though the issue has not been pleaded in the statement of opposition, the evidence shows that the application is, in fact, deficient (
Swift & Co. v. Monarch Fine Foods Co. Ltd.
(1983), 79 C.P.R.(2d) 69 (T.M.O.B.), and
Champagne Moet & Chandon v. Ridout Wines Ltd./Les Vins Ridout Ltée
(1983), 77 C.P.R.(2d) 63 (T.M.O.B.)).
[13]
Notwithstanding that the onus is on the applicant to establish entitlement to registration, the jurisprudence has clearly established that in the event the opponent specifically pleads a failure to comply with s. 30, this gives rise to a burden on the opponent to lead evidence in support of its plea (
Playboy Enterprises Inc. v. Germain
(1979), 29 N.R. 361; 43 C.P.R.(2d) 271 (F.C.A.), and
FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED
[14]
In the instant case, Molson has ascertained a negative fact, namely the accuracy of which is peculiarly within the knowledge of Pernod Ricard. The burden on Molson to lead evidence in support of its allegation is thus a light one (
John Labatt Limited v. Molson Companies Limited
(1990), 36 F.T.R. 70; 30 C.P.R.(3d) 293 (F.C.T.D.);
Tune Masters v. Mr. P's Mastertune
(1986), 10 C.P.R.(3d) 84 (T.M.O.B.);
Canadian Council for Professional Engineers v. Ontario Corp. No. 407,736
(1987), 15 C.P.R.(3d) 551 (T.M.O.B.), and
Nekoosa Packaging Corporation et al. v. AMCA International Limited et al.
(1989), 30 F.T.R. 127; 27 C.P.R.(3d) 153 (F.C.T.D.)). So as to meet this evidential burden, Molson has submitted the evidence of Mr. Nougayrol, whereas Pernod Ricard has failed to lead any evidence to meet the allegations of noncompliance with s. 30, which Molson claims to be fatal to its application.
[15]
In answer to these allegations, Pernod Ricard argues that Ricard was the original predecessor from 1954, succeeded by S.E.G.M. in 1975 and Pernod Ricard since the application in 1984. There is a series of trademarks involved and the statements of Mr. Nougayrol concerned another trademark and do not conflict with the use of the trademark in question. Moreover, there is jurisprudence to the effect that a subsidiary may be a predecessor (
John Labatt Ltd. v. Molson Companies Ltd.
(1984), 3 C.P.R.(3d) 192 (T.M.O.B.), and
Hardee's Food Systems v. Hardee Farms Int'l. Ltd.
(1984), 1 C.P.R.(3d) 417 (T.M.O.B.)). Thus, Molson has not established that Pernod Ricard has breached the requirements of s. 30(b) for failing to file the date from which the applicant or his named predecessors in title have used the trademark in Canada. The onus was on Molson to show breach of s. 30(b) and it has failed to do so, according to Pernod Ricard.
[16]
In his decision, the Registrar notes that Pernod Ricard elected not to file evidence but did submit an amended application on January 4, 1988, in which it claimed that use of the trademark "Ricard & Design" in Canada since 1954 was "par la requérante que [sic] ses prédécesseurs en titre et distributeurs 'Ricard' et 'Société Des Grandes Marques' (S.E.G.M.) en liaison avec toutes les marchandises spécifiques énumérées ...". The Registrar denied Molson's application to file additional evidence. However, as mentioned earlier, such additional evidence was filed, and properly so on appeal under s. 56(5) of the
Act
, namely the evidence of Mr. Nougayrol. Of course, that evidence of Mr. Nougayrol was not before the Registrar.
[17]
Molson's first ground of opposition before the Registrar was based on s. 30(b), as reported by the Registrar, "the opponent asserting that neither the applicant nor its alleged predecessors-in-title have used the trademark 'Ricard & Design' in Canada since 1954 and further that S.E.G.M. is not a predecessor-in-title to the applicant". The Registrar noted that there is an evidential burden on the opponent to establish the facts alleged by it and the amount of evidence to discharge this burden may be "very slight". However, the Registrar would not consider the affidavits of Mr. Nougayrol: "this opposition must be decided on the basis of the evidence filed in this proceeding and not on evidence filed in other opposition proceedings".
[18]
The evidence of Mr. Nougayrol is now properly before me and I must consider it. The least I can say is that this evidence is sufficient to discharge the slight evidential burden upon Molson. Unfortunately, Pernod Ricard filed no evidence to shed light on the matter so as to meet Molson's allegation supported by Mr. Nougayrol's evidence. Obviously, the arguments of respondent's counsel cannot be treated as evidence. Consequently, I find that Pernod Ricard has not met the requirements of s. 30(b) of the
Act
.
[19]
It follows that the appeal is allowed with costs. (L'avis d'appel a été déposé et plaidé en anglais par l'appelante. Par contre, l'intimé a présenté ses arguments dans la langue française. En conséquence, j'ai demandé à ce qu'une traduction soit produite dans les meilleurs délais.)
Appeal allowed.
Editor: Elizabeth M.A. Turgeon/blk
[End of document]
