[21]
Finally, the plaintiffs seek directions in respect of particular categories of costs, which if I were directing assessment of costs, I would deal with, as follows:
a) I would include fees for each of two counsel participating at trial, but I would not include fees of a third counsel which plaintiffs' requested, because I am not persuaded that a "large number of fact witnesses" required a third counsel. For many of the fact witnesses, their evidence was comparatively brief.
b) I would direct the assessment of reasonable travel, accommodation and related expenses for up to two counsel for attendance and participation in Saskatoon at examinations for discovery, mediation and pre-trial conferences, and for trial. In addition, I would allow travel for two counsel for two trips to St. Louis for consultation on testing and for taking of evidence. Travel expenses of a third or fourth counsel would not be directed.
c) I would direct that reasonable costs of investigations to collect, store and ship samples of canola grown on or adjacent to the defendants' lands is a recoverable disbursement.
d) I would allow reasonable disbursement costs for genetic testing and analysis, undertaken elsewhere than in the plaintiffs' own laboratories in St. Louis or any grow-out site used for testing by the plaintiffs' representatives. Costs of in-house analysis are not recoverable disbursements, in my opinion.
e) I would allow reasonable fees of expert witnesses other than employees of the plaintiffs, including disbursements for travel and for conduct money for fact witnesses at examinations for discovery or at trial.
f) I would not direct payment of expenses of representatives of the plaintiffs to attend mediation or pre-trial conference, or the trial itself, even if they attended by direction of the court. In my opinion, those are expenses of the parties not to be recompensed under an award of costs.
g) I would allow the plaintiffs' request for directions providing for reasonable disbursements for photocopying, both in-house and by commercial enterprises, to a maximum of $8,000.00 of the total $12,197.00 included in the draft bill of costs.
The defendants' submissions