[4]
The Respondent was born in Jamaica on February 19, 1971, and was landed in Canada on February 2, 1993; he has not become a Canadian citizen. On December 11, 2001, the Respondent plead guilty in Edmonton, Alberta, to a charge of possession of cocaine for the purposes of trafficking, contrary to s. 5(2) of the
Controlled Drugs and Substances Act
, an offense punishable by life in prison. Following the plea, Judge Caffaro of the Criminal Division of the Provincial Court of Alberta sentenced the Respondent on the basis of a joint submission by Crown counsel and defence counsel. As the sentence imposed was directly responsive to the joint submission, the content of the joint submission is important. The transcript of that proceeding contains the following statements (Applicant's Application Record, p. 19-20 and 23-24):
"MS. ESPEUT [Crown Counsel]: Sir, there's a joint submission before you for three years incarceration. I believe my friend will agree with my [sic] that this is a commercial trafficking operation, and following along the principles outlined in the case of Maskell, three years is an appropriate sentence for this accused. In addition to that, sir, perhaps as an aside with regards to the separate Project Calcium charges, those charges will be stayed against the accused. The accused is currently serving - or in pretrial custody in relation to the Project Calcium charges which will be stayed. So, as a result of that, we are asking the Court to take into consideration the time that the accused has spent in pretrial custody in relation to the Calcium charges and apply that time to these separate charges at a rate of two-to-one. Now, I can advise you, sir, that Smith was first arrested in relation to Project Calcium on September 15th, 2000. It's by my calculation on December 15th, 2001, he will have spent proximately 15 months in pretrial custody, and at a rate of two-to-one on that date, we arrive at approximately 30 months. So, I believe today we are about four days shy, or four days away from the 15th.
THE COURT: So, what you are saying is there is six months to go.
MS. ESPEUT: Approximately. Sir, those are all my submissions with regards to sentence, but I would like to make some submissions with regards to the order of forfeiture.
UNIDENTIFIED COUNSEL: Good morning, Your Honour. This matter is before the Court by way of agreement between Crown and defence on the facts and the ultimate disposition. Negotiations to achieve the agreement took four and a half months, commencing at the beginning of August and concluding this past Sunday.
. . . . .
In conclusion, the disposition of this case which is jointly urged upon the Court is within the guidelines of this jurisdiction. It acknowledges the gravity of this offence and accords due weight to Mr. Smith's circumstances which have made his incarceration a special hardship for him. It is presented to the Court as one which Your Honour can have full confidence in imposing.
THE COURT: Thank you, Mr. Richen. After having heard both the Crown and the defence, I am disposed to accept the joint submission. Mr. Smith, I am going to sentence you to three years, but the three years is not - has to be discounted because I am taking into account 30 months of practical custody, which is the 15 months you have spent in the Remand Centre times the normal factor of two. Therefore, leaves you with a sentence of six months to fulfill your agreed settlement sentence. There will be no victim fine surcharge."