[6]
The IAD's reading of Judge Caffaro's statements on sentencing is as follows (Applicant's Application Record, pp. 9-10)
"[13] As is self-evident from this extract, the sentencing Judge himself says both the three year sentence and the six months sentence is the 'sentence' he is imposing on Mr. Smith. But the final sentence imposed, the actual time Judge Caffaro ordered Mr. Smith to serve in custody, is six months.
"[14] I agree with Mr. Smith's counsel that this is the appropriate approach to take in terms of identifying the sentence imposed by the judge in the context of the provisions of subsections 64(1) and (2) of
IRPA
. In the context of removal order appeals, the Appeal Division does not 'look behind' a sentencing judge's decision in assessing an appellant's record of convictions and the other factors the sentencing judge takes into account in arriving at a final sentence.
. . . . .
"[17] Mr. Smith's counsel also notes that the sentencing judge's final sentence of six months incarceration is what is recorded on the Record of Conviction found at page 18, Exhibit C-1 to the Index of Documents for the Admissibility Hearing of Dwight Anthony Smith, found as part of the record and of counsel for Mr. Smith's submissions of October 15, 2002. In my books, what Correctional Services Canada says is the 'sentence' on a convicted accused's Record of Conviction is what the sentence is. That is the term of imprisonment the sentencing judge ultimately imposed on the convicted offender.
"[18] This document states that Mr. Smith 'was convicted of the said offence [of possession for the purposes of trafficking] and on the 11th day of December, 2001, the following punishment was imposed on him, namely, that the said accused be imprisoned in any prison for the term of 6.0 months.' Thus, I find that six months incarceration is the sentence which was imposed on Mr. Smith.
"[19] Because Mr. Smith was not sentenced to a term of imprisonment of at least two years as required by subsection 64(2), he does not lose his right of appeal."