[9]
In
I.B.M. Canada Ltd. v. Xerox of Canada Ltd. and Xerox Corp.
[see footnote 5], the Court had before it affidavits from three (3) attorneys in the United States addressing essentially the same issue. The Court noted that an analysis of the deponents' statements of account revealed a "... wide disparity between the hours spent in legal research and in the hourly rates charged in the research ...". Justice Urie, for the Federal Court of Canada, Appeal Division, wrote:
"... The sole question thus remaining to be settled in this appeal is whether or not the District Administrator proceeded on a wrong principle in allowing the disbursements made for the affidavits to which reference has previously been made without regard to the wide differences in the amount of the fees paid or, put [in] another way to allow such disbursements simply because those were the amounts in fact paid, apparently without question, by the respondents.
"In my opinion, the District Administrator erred in two ways. Firstly, while apparently accepting the essentiality of the affidavits, he did not examine the quality of the proof submitted to him in support of the submission that each disbursement itself was justified in the sense that it was one which could be chargeable to an adverse party as being reasonable, on a taxation of a party and party bill of costs. The nature of the proof submitted to him in this case falls substantially short of that which should be submitted to justify or explain the necessity for the considerable variations in expenditure of time and fees charged (in one case four lawyers were involved each with different billing rates).
"Secondly, on the face of the inadequate proof here submitted it was clear that the legal problem with which each deponent was confronted was identical, the only differences being in the ascertainment of how the United States federal courts in each of several districts applied the same provisions of the
United States Code
. Notwithstanding this the taxing officer allowed widely different sums for their respective opinions. In my view, since there was a common denominator in the nature of the opinions sought, as a matter of principle there ought to be at least some relationship between the fees allowed in payment for them, if fairness is to be accorded the adverse party liable for the payment. ..."