[22]
In his reasons in support of his assessment of costs, the assessment officer wrote at paragraphs 63 and 64:
"[63] The Apotex Respondent has claimed $28,236.46 for the expert fees of Dr. David Weissburg. I repeat some of the Merck Applicants' concerns raised above in paragraph [16] that the Affidavit of David Weissburg, sworn May 12, 2004, was only five pages in length. The Merck Applicants also refer to the Reasons for Order and Order dated May 26, 2005 in this proceeding which noted that the 'affidavit does not contain expert opinion but rather describes events and hearsay statements made by others.' In addition, the Merck Applicants submit that the Dr. Weissburg invoices do not contain many details regarding the 'consulting time' spent by this specific expert. The Merck Applicants submit in paragraph 89 of its [sic] Written Submissions of the Applicants that this 'type' of 'bald statement' is insufficient evidence to justify costs for expert fees and refers [sic] to
AlliedSignal
, supra, at paragraph 47 which states:
'[47] ... It is the requirement that sufficient or reasonable proof be lead to satisfy the Taxing Officer that expenses were incurred. It all becomes then a question of degree of evidence. A [bald] statement of the kind singled out by Mr. Justice Teitelbaum in the Diversified case and also found in the F-C Research Institute case, would not be sufficient to satisfy a Taxing Officer. Likewise, absolute and detailed evidence is not an indispensable requirement for an award to be made. As my colleague Stinson, Taxing Officer, said on numerous occasions the more thorough and complete the evidence is, the less the result will be bound up into the Taxing Officer's discretion, but that does not mean a Taxing Officer is refrained from resorting to his discretion to make an award in the absence of cogent evidence.'
"[64] As determined in paragraph [18] above, the Federal Court allowed the Affidavit of David Weissburg to be filed for limited purposes notwithstanding the fact that the Merck Applicants filed motions to have this and several other Apotex Respondent's affidavits struck from the file. The invoices from David Weissburg contained in Exhibit C to the Affidavit of Andrew R. Brodkin, sworn on March 7, 2006, indicate a number of time periods (i.e.: -'14FEB04 - 31MAY04'), specific hours for each time period that David Weissburg claimed he had worked on this proceeding and, also included, were a number of expenses [sic] amounts within these invoices. Although the invoices do not contain 'absolute and detailed evidence' as described above in
AlliedSignal
, supra, outlined in this paragraph, I am satisfied that the Apotex Respondent incurred these expenses. For these reasons and relying on the sentiment expressed in
Dableh
, supra, outlined above in paragraph [62], I exercise my discretion and allow the $28,236.46 plus associated GST for this disbursement."
The reference in the foregoing quotation to "
AlliedSignal
" is to
Allied Signal Inc. v. Dupont Canada Inc. et al.
[see footnote 9]. The reference to "
Dableh
" is to
Dableh v. Ontario Hydro
[see footnote 10].