[43]
After a brief analysis of the positions of the parties on the above, the assessment officer concluded at paragraph 30 of his reasons as follows:
"[30] Regarding the remaining travel disbursements, it is appropriate that I turn to the decision in
Grace M. Carlile v. Her Majesty the Queen
, ... :
'...
Taxing Officers are often faced with less than exhaustive proof and must be careful, while ensuring that unsuccessful litigants are not burdened with unnecessary or unreasonable costs, to not penalize successful litigants by denial of indemnification when it is apparent that real costs were indeed incurred.
This presumes a subjective role for the Taxing Officer in the process of taxation. My Reasons ...: [in]
Youssef Hanna Dableh v. Ontario Hydro
... [cite] a series of Reasons for Taxation shaping the approach to taxation of costs.
Dableh
was appealed but the appeal was dismissed with Reasons by the Associate Chief Justice ... . I have considered disbursements in these Bills of Costs in a manner consistent with these various decisions. Further,
Phipson on Evidence
, ... states
that the "standard of proof required in civil cases is generally expressed as proof on the balance of probabilities". Accordingly, the onset of taxation should not generate a leap upwards to some absolute threshold. If the proof is less than absolute for the full amount claimed and the Taxing Officer, faced with uncontradicted evidence, albeit scanty, that real dollars were indeed expended to drive the litigation, the Taxing Officer has not properly discharged a quasi-judicial function by taxing at zero dollars as the only alternative to the full amount. Litigation such as this does not unfold solely due to the charitable donations of disinterested third persons. On a balance of probabilities, a result of zero dollars at taxation would be absurd.
' [emphasis added in the assessment officer's reasons]
"For the reasons I have outlined above and considering the sentiment expressed in
Grace M. Carlile
, supra, I exercise my discretion to reduce and allow the remaining travel disbursements of $75,851.89 plus applicable GST. For greater clarification, the total travel costs of $79,881.62, which includes the amount of $4,029.73 in paragraph [30] above, are allowed for all of the disbursements associated with all of the cross-examinations for this proceeding."