[55]
In accordance with the foregoing reasons, this review of an assessment of costs will be allowed in part in favour of Merck. The Certificate of Assessment issued herein by the assessment officer will be adjusted to reduce the assessment allowed by $206,411.00 with the result that the Apotex Respondent's Bill of Costs will be assessed and allowed in the amount of $384,686.01 for assessable services and disbursements which includes applicable GST, payable by Merck to the Apotex Respondent.
Motion allowed in part.
Editor: Anick Ouellette-Levesque/vnh
Footnotes
1. SOR/98-106.
2. SOR/93-133.
3. (2005), 41 C.P.R.(4th) 35.
4. (2004), 327 N.R. 179 (F.C.A.).
5. [1977] 1 F.C. 181; 12 N.R. 440 (F.C.A.).
6. (1999), 176 F.T.R. 142; 2 C.P.R.(4th) 368 (T.D.).
7. [2007] F.T.R. Uned. 201; 2007 FC 344, March 30, 2007.
8. See paragraph 37 of Justice Mosley's reasons for a brief summary of the qualifications of each of the "expert" affiants.
9. (1997), 81 C.P.R.(3d) 129 (F.C.T.D.).
10. [1994] F.C.J. No. 1810, November 2, 1994.
11. [1997] F.C.J. No. 885, May 8, 1997.
12. [1985] 1 C.T.C. 327 (F.C.T.D.).
13. (1984), 1 C.P.R.(3d) 204 (F.C.T.D.).
ANNEX I
(paragraph [15])
Grounds for Review of the Costs Award
The Expert Disbursements
8. In the Costs Award, the Assessment Officer erred in allowing Apotex to recover a total of $411,473.91 in respect of the expert fees incurred by eight Apotex witnesses, some of which were unsupported by the evidence, all of which were unreasonable.
9. The Assessment Officer also committed an error of principle by misapprehending the legal test for determining the "reasonableness" of these fees, and by ignoring the relevant guiding jurisprudence of this Court, including:
(i) The Assessment Officer ordered Merck to pay Apotex expert fees of $411,473.91, an amount more than 12 times higher than the total counsel fees taxed at the ordinary Tariff rate (as ordered by Justice Mosley). Awarding this amount of expert fees is not only punitive, but unprecedented in a PM(NOC) proceeding and tantamount to issuing Apotex a "blank cheque award". This Court has expressed concern with escalating expert fees, and has issued directions that these fees should not exceed those allowed for lead counsel in preparing and arguing the case;
(ii) The Assessment Officer awarded Apotex its costs for eight experts, even though this Court has declared this to be an "excessive" number of expert witnesses in a PM(NOC) proceeding. Many of these experts were asked to address the same issues resulting in unnecessary duplication in the material filed;
(iii) In awarding Apotex expert fees in the amount of $411,473.91, the Assessment Officer has effectively made a punitive cost award that is entirely unjustified by the decision on the merits. Justice Mosley determined that the key issue at stake in this litigation concerned a therapeutic treatment protocol, namely the once-weekly administration of the 70 mg dose to avoid the side-effects commonly associated with daily doses of FOSAMAX®. Clearly, Justice Mosley recognized that this was not an overly complex case, as he explicitly rejected Apotex's request for costs assessed at column five and awarded costs "on the ordinary scale";
(iv) Many of Apotex's experts, including Dr. Langer, were involved in previous litigation regarding the drug FOSAMAX® and, as such, were already well-acquainted with the prior art and issues at play in this proceeding; and
(v) The Assessment Officer failed to properly consider and weigh the actual "reasonableness" of the expert fees. In particular, he placed inordinate focus on the fact that Apotex's evidence was accepted for filing, and preferred by Justice Mosley, as justification for making the Costs Award.
10. The Assessment Officer erred in allowing Apotex to recover $155,680.00 in respect of the expert fees incurred by Dr. Langer. Dr. Langer's expert fees were more than seven times higher than any of the other expert fees at issue. Merck should not be required to reimburse Apotex for hiring a "Cadillac" expert. The Assessment Officer failed to properly assess the reasonableness of Dr. Langer's fees in view of the fees and hours billed by other experts in the proceeding for comparable work, the role his evidence played with respect to the key issues at stake in the litigation, his involvement in related Canadian litigation, and the inadequate documentation proffered to support the claimed fees.
11. The Assessment Officer further erred in allowing Apotex to recover an additional $82,016.00 in respect of the expert fees incurred by Dr. Langer's assistant, Dr. Lipp. The Assessment Officer failed to properly consider that Dr. Lipp did not file an affidavit in this proceeding, yet charged the second highest amount of expert fees (after Dr. Langer). In fact, the fees incurred by Dr. Lipp in assisting Dr. Langer were anywhere from $20,000.00 to $40,000.00 more than experts who filed comparable affidavit evidence in this proceeding. Further or in the alternative, the Assessment Officer failed to consider the reasonableness of Dr. Lipp's fees in view of the inordinately high amount already being charged by Dr. Langer for the same work product, and the inadequate documents tendered to support the fees claimed.
12. The Assessment Officer also erred in allowing Apotex to recover $28,236.46 in respect of the expert fees incurred by Mr. Weissburg. The Assessment Officer failed to properly consider the reasonableness of these fees in view of the weight this evidence was afforded at trial, and the fees and hours billed by other experts in the proceeding. He further erred in assessing the reasonableness of these fees on the basis of inadequate evidence.
13. The Assessment Officer further erred in allowing Apotex to recover $63,997.27 in expert fees for Dr. Mayersohn. In so doing, the Assessment Officer erred in assessing fees on the basis of inadequate documents tendered to support the claimed fees.
14. The Assessment Officer further erred in allowing Apotex to recover a total of $81,044.18 in expert fees for Dr. Compston, Dr. Mazess, and Dr. Markowitz. In so doing, the Assessment Officer failed to consider the involvement, and subsequent accumulated expertise of these witnesses in related litigation in Canada and other jurisdictions.
15. Further or in the alternative, and for all of the reasons above, the amount of expert fees assessed is excessive and unreasonable to the extent that an error of principle was the cause.
The Prior Art Disbursements
16. The Assessment Officer erred in allowing Apotex to recover $7,205.51 in disbursements related to the collection of prior art. The Assessment Officer ignored the Applicants' unchallenged evidence that this was an unreasonable duplication of costs. In so doing, the Assessment Officer committed an error of principle by misapprehending the legal test for considering the evidence of disbursements, including the adequacy of evidence in support of this disbursement. Further or in the alternative, the amount assessed was so unreasonable that an error of principle was the cause.
The Travel Disbursements
17. The Assessment Officer further erred in assessing travel disbursements for two counsel in the amount of $79,881.62. The Assessment Officer failed to properly assess the reasonableness of this expense for many of the reasons listed in paragraph 9 above, and failed to properly weigh the related fact that Apotex did not obtain a court direction to claim counsel fees for more than one counsel. Further or in the alternative, the amount assessed was so unreasonable that an error of principle was the cause.
The Photocopy Disbursements
18. The Assessment Officer also erred in assessing photocopy disbursements in the amount of $10,000.00 by estimating that eight copies were necessary to satisfy the service, filing and use of documents by the Respondent. The Assessment Officer failed to assess the unreasonableness of this disbursement in view of the evidence provided and by over-estimating the number of copies necessary to satisfy the requirements of the
Federal Court Rules
.
Other Disbursements
19. The Assessment Officer also erred in assessing disbursements for computer searches, computer time charges, courier/postage, court reporter/transcripts, meetings, telephone charges and telecopy charges in the amount of $25,247.66. The Assessment Officer failed to properly assess the reasonableness of these expenses in view of many of the reasons listed in paragraph 9 and committed an error of principle by misapprehending the legal test on evidence of disbursements, including the adequacy of evidence in support of these disbursements as being essential to the conduct of the action. Further or in the alternative, the amount assessed was so unreasonable that an error of principle was the cause. ...
ANNEX II
(paragraph [35])
[52] The Apotex Respondent has claimed $322,512.84 for the expert fees of Dr. Robert Langer. The Merck Applicants submit in paragraph 72 of its Written Submissions that "Apotex has failed to demonstrate the reasonableness of this amount in these proceedings." The Merck Applicants note that Dr. Langer had already filed an expert affidavit in the related Fosamax #1 and should have been familiar with a majority of the prior art. In addition, the Merck Applicants submit that the number of hours that both Dr. Langer and his assistant Michael Lipp spent on this file was 474 hours, or 224 hours and 250 hours respectively, which it submits is approximately four months of full-time work in relation to a single expert affidavit. (Please note that I have corrected the number of hours claimed for Dr. Lipp and the total number of hours claimed since it appears that the Merck Applicants have inadvertently stated an incorrect total). Finally, the Merck Applicants note that the billing rate of Dr. Langer for this proceeding appears to have more than doubled between the commencement of all four associated Fosamax proceedings (T-568-03, T-884-03, T-1053-03 and T-1106-03) even though they were initiated within three months of each other. The Merck Applicants submit that this is in essence a "blank cheque award" approach to hiring expert "Cadillac" witnesses and refer to
Apotex Inc. v. Syntex Pharmaceuticals International Ltd.
(1999), 2 C.P.R.(4th) 368 (T.D.) at paragraphs 20 to 21 wherein, the Federal Court refers to "outrageous" expert fees, "reasonable expenses of the litigation" and that "the unsuccessful party will not be responsible to compensate for extravagance."
[53] In response to the Merck Applicants submissions that a number of the expert fees are excessive, including those of Dr. Langer and Dr. Lipp as I have outlined above, the Apotex Respondent repeats its submissions regarding the "extraordinary amounts at issue" which it suggests may reach one billion dollars. The Apotex Respondent submits at paragraph 61 of its Reply Submissions that "Apotex sought to engage one of the highest qualified experts in the field." I note that a short summary of some of Dr. Langer's achievements are attached to the Reply Submissions at Tab 3 and I do not dispute that Dr. Langer is well regarded and respected within the world scientific community. In support of its justification to engage the services of Dr. Langer, the Apotex Respondent refers once again to the proposition expressed in
Apotex Inc.
, supra, as outlined above in paragraph [33] that it "is not appropriate to apply the test of hindsight (20/20 vision) to determine whether a service was for an extra service or frill not reasonably necessary to defend the client's position." In other words, the Apotex Respondent submits at paragraph 62 of its Reply Submissions, "when assessing costs, the Courts have stressed the importance of not reviewing a party's fees with hindsight."
[54] The Apotex Respondent notes that the Merck Applicants took two full days to cross-examine Dr. Langer on his evidence which it submits favours the significance of his testimony and the complexity of the proceeding. The Apotex Respondent also notes the Merck Applicants' concerns with regard to the number of hours both Dr. Langer and Dr. Lipp spent on preparing one expert affidavit. The Apotex Respondent submits at paragraph 64 of its Reply Submissions that the "Merck argument that Drs. Langer and Lipp ought to have performed their work more efficiently is absurd." The Apotex Respondent submits that the quality of work for this evidence was "performed by some of the most
renowned
[sic] experts in the world. For these reasons, the Apotex Respondent submits that the Merck Applicants' submissions regarding the expert fees of Dr. Langer and Dr. Lipp "must be rejected."
[55] It should be noted that the Merck Applicants have suggested a proposed billing formula that uses one of the Apotex Respondent's expert's hourly rate and billable hours as benchmarks to reduce the expert fees of Dr. Langer. When factoring in a suggested reduced hourly rate and a reduced number of hours for Dr. Langer, the Merck Applicants submit that Dr. Langer's expert fees should be reduced to $19,600.00. I am uncomfortable with this suggestion for the simple reason that the proposal seems to be a very arbitrary method of determining the expert fees, so I will not explore or outline this proposal any further.