[61] I do not agree with the Merck Applicants' submissions regarding the amount and reasonableness of Dr. Lipp's expert fees. The Apotex Respondent's have referred to
Apotex Inc.
, supra, as outlined above in paragraph [33], which the Apotex Respondent submits stands for the proposition whether it is appropriate to apply the test of hindsight to determine whether a charge for disbursements was not reasonably necessary to defend their position. However, I rely on the sentiment expressed in
Dableh v. Ontario Hydro,
[1994] F.C.J. 1810, which may be more on point, wherein the Taxing Officer at paragraph 15 stated:
"[15] It may seem anomalous that one professional in the process i.e. the solicitor; qualifies only for partial indemnification and another professional in the process i.e. the engineer; qualifies for full indemnification but that is the scheme of costs relative to the principle of partial indemnity set up in the
Rules
and Tariff subject to the authority of Rule 344(1) or other overriding legislation. The test, particularly in the face of a disinterested business relationship without collusion between an expert selling his or her services and a litigant purchasing said services to fill a void in the expertise requisite to success in the litigation, is not to cut experts' accounts down to some lowest common denominator. I have evidence here of real invoices apparently received and paid.
The test or threshold, for indemnification of disbursements such as these, is not a function of hindsight but whether, in the circumstances existing at the time a litigant's solicitor made the decision to incur the expenditure, it represented prudent and reasonable representation of the client both in terms of leading and responding to Rule 482 expert evidence and of filling the void of technical expertise requisite to the solicitor's preparation and conduct. Austerity must be a factor in costs: I am not suggesting that experts should always be indemnified for the entire period of a trial.
Here, Dr. Laithwaite left on the last day of his testimony but was subsequently consulted briefly via long distance telephone. At taxation, Defendant's counsel supplemented the evidence with oral explanation and invited me to infer, from the record, the importance of Dr. Laithwaite and Dr. Lavers both as experts and consultants. The Mills affidavit supporting the Bill of Costs did not address this. My Reasons, supra, indicate that the uses of experts encompass both Tariff B1(2)(a) and (b) and further that the taxing party faces variable results depending on the proof led. Further, they indicate that, in the absence of sufficiently detailed proof, the result may be necessarily conservative so as to embrace the interests of the respondent at taxation but coincidentally not provide an absurd result for the taxing party." (Emphasis added)