[1]
Denault, J.
: This is an application by the Royal Canadian Mounted Police Public Complaints Commission ("The Commission"), under s. 38(1) of the Canada Evidence Act R.S.C. 1985, c. C-5, for the determination of the objection to disclosure of information made by Assistant Commissioner Murray in a Certificate dated June 7, 1990.
[2]
The issue relates to two complaints filed by Darrell T. Rankin concerning an alleged use of excessive force and an infringement of his right to freedom of expression, filed pursuant to s. 45.35(1)(a) of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police Act (R.C.M.P. Act) R.S.C. 1985 (2nd Supp.), c. C-8. The complaints were filed after an incident occurred on February 10, 1989 wherein the complainant was engaged in an authorized demonstration protesting cruise missile testing in Canada on the occasion of the visit of President George Bush of the United States of America. The demonstration was to take place on Sussex Drive in the vicinity of the External Affairs Building. The R.C.M.P. established secure and sterile zones disallowing protesters on the north side of Sussex. Several minutes prior to the arrival of the presidential motorcade, the complainant Rankin crossed Sussex to the north side carrying a large banner which said "George take your missiles home". S.Sgt. Bergeron of the R.C.M.P. arrived and advised him that no one was allowed on the north side of Sussex. The complainant refused to relocate, claiming that he had a permit. The claimant submits that Bergeron grabbed his arm, twisted it behind his back, and forced him face first over the trunk of the car, and then into the back of the police vehicle. S.Sgt. Bergeron's evidence with respect to the amount of force used to put Rankin in the vehicle is different.
[3]
There was a hearing by the Commission of the complaints on May 22nd and 23rd, 1990. The applicant Commission in the course of its hearing issued an order to the respondent (R.C.M.P.) to produce for inspection and examination by the Counsel for the applicant the following:
i) File No. P.O.B. - 200 - a respondent intelligence file,
ii) a respondent intelligence file referred to in the testimony of Sgt. Angelo Fiore of the Ottawa Police Force,
iii) The Protective Policing Manual as related to VIP Security and Protection.
[4]
In response to the order, the respondent made an oral objection to disclosure of the aforementioned information under s. 37(1) of the Canada Evidence Act. At the request of the Applicant Commission, the respondent filed a Certificate of objection on the basis that the disclosure of the information would be injurious to the public interest, namely, the sound and effective functioning of the R.C.M.P. and of other police and security forces in Canada and elsewhere, the conduct of criminal investigations, the implementation of criminal law. He also added that some documents contained information the disclosure of which would be injurious to the national security of Canada and international relations.
[5]
The Commission subsequently filed an application pursuant to s. 38 of the Canada Evidence Act with the Federal Court to determine the validity of the objection.
Preliminary Objection
[6]
Counsel for the R.C.M.P. raised a preliminary objection to the Commission taking an aggressive role to overturn the Certificate. It submits that the Commission's role as an impartial body is to investigate complaints by members of the public concerning the performance of duties by members and officers of the R.C.M.P., and to make recommendations based on the investigation to the Commissioner and the Solicitor General, but not to take an aggressive role in the proceedings.
[7]
In response, the Commission argues it has the powers of a board of inquiry in relation to the matter before it, by virtue of s. 45.45(4) of the R.C.M.P. Act, and that the purpose behind the creation of the Commission is to ensure that members of the public are treated fairly and impartially. The Commission relies on a judgment [see Footnote 1] of MacKay, J., of this court who had this to say on Part VI (R.C.M.P. Public Complaints Commission) and Part VII (Public Complaints) of the R.C.M.P. Act:
"I am prepared to conclude that Parts VI and VII in the amendments to the Act were enacted with the primary objective of protecting the public and the R.C.M.P. itself from the risk of an apprehension of or actual bias in dealing with complaints about police conduct. Prior to these amendments, the R.C.M.P. itself was functioning as the sole arbiter of complaints made against it. The opportunity for independent and open reviews by the Commission of the R.C.M.P. disposal of complaints can only enhance confidence of the general public in the force and its activities."
[8]
The Commission also argues that s. 38(1) of the Canada Evidence Act can be made "on application" and places no restriction on as to whom may bring the application. It reads as follows:
"38(1) Where an objection to the disclosure of information is made under subsection 37(1) on grounds that the disclosure would be injurious to international relations or national defence or security, the objection may be determined, on application, in accordance with subsection 37(2) only by the Chief Justice of the Federal Court, or such other judge of that Court as the Chief Justice may designate to hear such applications."
[9]
I agree with that proposition but the question is whether it is appropriate for the Commission to bring the application considering the mandate conferred upon it by Parliament.
[10]
The Commission submits that s. 45.45(11) of the R.C.M.P. Act confers upon it the jurisdiction to compel the production of the Certificate. Section 45.45(11) reads like this:
"45.45(11) A hearing to inquire into a complaint shall be held in public, except that the Commission may order the hearing or any part of the hearing to be held in private if it is of the opinion that during the course of the hearing any of the following information will likely be disclosed, namely,
a) information the disclosure of which could reasonably be expected to be injurious to the defence of Canada or any state allied or associated with Canada or the detection, prevention or suppression of subversive or hostile activities;
b) information the disclosure of which could reasonably be expected to be injurious to law enforcement; and
c) information respecting a person's financial or personal affairs where the person's interest outweighs the public's interest in the information."
[11]
That section allows the Commission to order the hearing to be held in private "if it is of the opinion that during the course of the hearing any of the following information
will likely be disclosed
..." (emphasis added). The plain wording of the section does not give the Commission power to compel the evidence. Rather it is a procedural device to assist the Commission in holding in camera proceedings where in its opinion any information likely to be disclosed would reasonably be expected to be injurious to the defence of Canada or any state allied or associated with Canada or injurious to law enforcement. This section does not give the Commission power to compel this type of evidence. The intent of Parliament was to allow the Commission, in its discretion, to hold the proceedings in camera. The Commission cannot bring this application on the strength of s. 45.45(11).
[12]
The Commission here has some but not all of the powers of a Board of Inquiry (s. 24.1(3), R.C.M.P. Act). Parliament incorporated by reference the power of a Board of Inquiry to summon any person before that board and require that person to give evidence, to administer oaths, and to receive and accept on oath evidence as the board sees fit whether or not it would be admissible in a court of law. (s. 45.45(4)) It did not grant the power to examine the records and to make inquiries as the board deems necessary.
[13]
The Commission is further restricted by s. 45.45(8)(a) in that it cannot receive any evidence that would be inadmissible in a court of law by reason of any privilege under the law of evidence. Contrast this with another tribunal, the Security Intelligence Review Committee [see Footnote 2], which can hear privileged evidence.
[14]
Considering the impartial role given to the Commission, the question is whether it is appropriate for it to bring this application on behalf of the complainant. It is instructive to refer to Justice Estey's remarks in Northwestern Utilities Limited et al. v. The City of Edmonton [see Footnote 3] wherein counsel to a utility board presented detailed and elaborate arguments supporting its decision in favour of the company:
"Such active and aggressive participation can have no other effect than to discredit the impartiality of an administrative tribunal either in the case where the matter is referred back to it, or in future proceedings involving similar interests and issues or the same parties. The Board is given a clear opportunity to make its point in its reasons for decision and it abuses on'e notion of propriety to countenance its participation as a full-fledged litigant in this Court, in complete adversarial confrontation with one of the principals in the contest before the Board itself in the first instance."
Justice Estey added that it has been the policy of the Supreme Court "to limit the role of an administrative tribunal whose decision is at issue before the Court, even where the right to appear is given by statute, to an explanatory role with reference to the record before the Board and to the making of representations relating to jurisdiction". [see Footnote 4] Mahoney, J., following upon the S.C.C. Paccar [see Footnote 5] decision commented that only when its jurisdiction is in issue is it appropriate for an administrative tribunal to appear in court. [see Footnote 6] As a quasi-judicial tribunal, the Commission has an obligation to appear and act impartially. The policy being that when the matter is remitted back for a hearing with or without the impugned evidence, the Commission will have to resume its role as an arbitrator.
[15]
Accordingly the Commission has the obligation to be and appear to be impartial as a quasi-judicial body. [see Footnote 7] This court holds that it is inappropriate that the Commission take the initiative of an application under s. 38(1) of the Canada Evidence Act. However, in the present circumstances it would serve no useful purpose to dismiss the applicant's motion on that ground since the complainant's counsel adopted the position of the Commission. It would not serve the interest of the parties to deny the applicant Rankin's motion. Therefore, this court will consider the merits of the case.
Merits of the Case
[16]
The question to be addressed is whether the public interest in the administration of justice would outweigh the public interest in nondisclosure as articulated in the Certificate of Assistant Commissioner Murray, Director of Protective Policing.
[17]
Summing up, the Commission issued an order for the inspection by Counsel for the Public Complaints Commission of two R.C.M.P. intelligence files and the Protective Policing Manual. Even though Assistant Commissioner Murray issued the Certificate pursuant to s. 37(1) of the Canada Evidence Act, on the grounds of a specific public interest, paragraph 9 of the Certificate clearly states that the objection is also made on grounds that the disclosure would be injurious to the national security of Canada and international relations (s. 38(1)).
[18]
Counsel for the Commission objected to the Certificate on two grounds: first, the information requested does not fall within the ambit of ss. 37 and 38 of the Canada Evidence Act and second, Assistant Commissioner Murray is in a conflict of interest.
[19]
With respect to the first objection, concerning mainly the Protective Policing Manual as related to VIP Security and Protection, the Commission submits that is does not always contain information the disclosure of which could result in injury to the nation. While it might be injurious to the sound and effective functioning of the R.C.M.P. and of other police and security forces in Canada and elsewhere in conducting criminal investigations and implementing criminal investigations, it is not "information which would be injurious to international relations or national defence". It submits that an objection to disclosure of the information can only be maintained if its disclosure would be injurious to international relations, or national defence or security.
[20]
I disagree. Section 37(1) of the Canada Evidence Act allows an objection to disclosure of any government information to be filed in any court, on grounds of a specified public interest. Section 38(1) allows an objection to be determined only by the Chief Justice of the Federal Court, or such other judge of that court as the Chief Justice may designate to hear such applications if an objection to the disclosure is made "on grounds that the disclosure would be injurious to international relations or national defence or security". The Commission's submission assumes that domestic policing operations can be separated from international security operations. On the contrary, the Certificate filed by Assistant Commissioner Murray indicates, amongst other reasons, that the operations between the police forces in Canada and abroad are interrelated by way of "exchanges of criminal intelligence and, in some cases, of resources". [see Footnote 8] The Certificate asserts that this information provided in confidence to the R.C.M.P. will not be disclosed without the consent of the police or security force providing it. To do so would compromise the relationship between Canadian security forces and those abroad. Moreover, the information referred to in the Certificate relates to a visit of the President of the United States of America which itself has risk from terrorist organizations and raises issues of national and international security.
[21]
The second objection to the Certificate is that there is a conflict of interest. It submits that for the R.C.M.P. through the Assistant Commissioner Murray to file a Certificate creates a conflict of interest because the party filing the Certificate for nondisclosure is also a party to the proceedings by virtue of s. 45.45(15) of the R.C.M.P. Act. He then becomes judge and party. I do not share that view because there is no evidence that Assistant Commissioner Murray was in any way involved in the complainant's case. The only involvement that Assistant Commissioner Murray had was to render an opinion regarding the disclosure of certain information, which is appropriate considering his position as Director of Protective Policing.
[22]
In this Application, the Court must weigh the public interest in the administration of justice against the public interest in nondisclosure set forth in the Certificate. Chief Justice Thurlow as he then was, established the test in Goguen v. Gibson [see Footnote 9]:
"... before exercising the authority to examine the information the judge hearing the application will have to be persuaded on the material that is before him either that the case for disclosure, that is to say, the importance of the public interest in disclosure, in the circumstances outweighs the importance of the public interest in keeping the information immune from disclosure or, at least that the balance is equal and calls for examination of the information in order to determine which public interest is more important in the circumstances. [see Footnote 10]
. . . . .
"... the object of the Court's examination, when an examination takes place, will be to ascertain whether a preponderance of importance in favour of disclosure exists. That seems to be the expressed intention of the subsection."
and the former Chief Justice added:
"On the other hand, if no apparent case for disclosure has been made out, if the balance does not so much as appear to be even, the preponderance obviously favours the upholding of the objection and in such a situation I do not think the subsection requires the Court to examine the information to see if it will tip the balance the other way."
[23]
In weighing the interests in disclosure and nondisclosure, the Court must inquire as to whether the documents are necessary, of critical importance to the complainant, and whether the applicant (Mr. Rankin) would be prejudiced if the documents are not provided.
[24]
Mr. Rankin's first complaint relates to an alleged use of force against him in that, while being involved in a demonstration protesting cruise missile testing in Canada, "he was pressed up against an R.C.M.P. vehicle and his arm was twisted behind his back" [see Footnote 11]. The second complaint relates to a denial of his freedom of expression in that he would have been ordered "to fold up and put away a banner (he) wished to display ... and told he could not display the banner" [see Footnote 12]. The finding of whether he was mistreated by the use of excessive force, or whether his right to demonstrate was actually infringed, is a factual finding which depends on the particular facts of the circumstances. In coming to its conclusion, the Commission must weigh the evidence of Mr. Rankin against that of the R.C.M.P. and decide whether there was abuse in this specific circumstance. It has not been shown to the satisfaction of the Court that the Protective Policing Manual, the respondent intelligence file and the File No. P.O.B.-200 are necessary with respect to this finding of fact. The materials do not relate to a material fact in issue and the information is not relied upon by the R.C.M.P. as part of its defence. Accordingly, the impugned documents are not critical to Mr. Rankin's complaint against the R.C.M.P. and he would not be prejudiced by their nondisclosure.
[25]
It is to be noted that the Public Complaints Commission is neither a court of record, nor statutorily entitled to issue sanctions against the member whose conduct is in issue. Its role is simply to make a recommendation to the Minister. (s. 45.46)
[26]
On this basis the public interest in disclosure of the information is not served. On the contrary, the public interest would be ill served if sensitive material is disclosed when it is not even crucial to a finding of fact.
[27]
On this basis, the applicant's case must be rejected and a fortiori that of the Public Complaints Commission. It fails to meet all of the relevant criteria.
[28]
The application is denied. This is not a case where costs should be awarded.
Application dismissed.
Editor: Debra F. MacCausland/dmh
Footnotes
1. FRAGMENT_SUPPRESSED
2. Canadian Security Intelligence Service Act, R.S.C. 1985, c. C-23 (ss. 39(2) and (3))
3. Northwestern Utilities Ltd. et al. v. Edmonton, [1979] 1 S.C.R. 684, at p. 709; 23 N.R. 565.
4. Ibid. p. 710.
5. Paccar of Canada Ltd. v. Canadian Association of Industrial, Mechanical and Allied Workers, Local 14 (1989), 102 N.R. 1.
6. Ferguson Bus Lines Ltd. v. Amalgamated Transit Union, Local 1374 (1990), 108 N.R. 293.
7. Northwestern Utilities Limited, Ferguson, supra.
8. Assistant Commissioner Murray's Certificate, paragraph 21.
9. Goguen and Albert v. Gibson, [1983] 1 F.C. 872, at p. 888. (A.D.)
10. Goguen and Albert v. Gibson, [1983] 1 F.C. 872, at p. 888. (A.D.)
11. Schedule "A" to the affidavit of Perry William Kelly.
12. Schedule "B" to the affidavit of Perry William Kelly.
[End of document]
