[179]
In
The Pickaninny
the issue was the priority of the mortgagee over the necessaries supplier who repaired the ship following a collision, the ship then being sold by court order. Mr. Justice Hewson placed the burden on counsel for the ship repairer to show that the mortgagee knew and was fully informed as to the part being played by the ship repairer. The evidence was to the effect that the London agent for the owners reported to the Dover agent for the owners that it had kept both the owner and the mortgagee apprised throughout of everything it had done for owners as agent. Mr. Justice Hewson was doubtful whether any of this was evidence against the mortgagee at all, but that even if it were, it did not satisfy him that the mortgagee in fact was in possession of full knowledge of the facts. In the result there was no departure from the usual priorities, placing the mortgagee ahead of the repairer, however Mr. Justice Hewson did sum up the law which might apply:
"It seems to me that there would have to be very strong reliable evidence before a court could upset the normal run of priorities established by judgments over many years in the Admiralty Court. I have been referred to several cases, namely,
The Scio
(1867), L.R. 1 A. & E. 353; also to a passage from
The Zigurds
, [1932] P. 113; (1932) 43 Ll.L.Rep. 387, and to
Bristow v. Whitmore
(1861), 9 H.L.C. 391. These cases, so far as they assist me in this particular motion, indicate that the court must be slow to depart from the usual order of priorities. As I have already said, Mr. Barry Sheen stressed upon me that where you adopt the benefit of something you also take the burden. Well, that is a statement of natural justice which, of course, is true. He says that it would be wholly inequitable to postpone a claimant who has expended his money directly to the benefit of the mortgagees if, at that time, the mortgagees knew that mortgagor was insolvent and also that at that time the mortgagees had knowledge that the money had been so spent by the claimant. I have already dealt with the latter part of that by saying that in the evidence before me I am not satisfied that the first mortgagees were aware of George Hammond & Co.'s undertaking, and there is certainly no evidence before me from which I can find that at any material time leading up to the events of this motion the mortgagors were insolvent." (page 537)
The elements here, needed to postpone a mortgagee's claim, are strong and reliable evidence of knowledge of money being spent on the ship which would be of direct benefit to the mortgagee and, concurrently, knowledge that the mortgagor was insolvent. But I do not think the law goes so far as either to require a mortgagee to be so intimately involved with the affairs of the mortgagor as to know of its day to day operational matters, or of financial problems the mortgagor keeps hidden in the short run, or to require that a mortgagee owe any independent duty to advise a necessaries supplier in other situations.