[184]
The plaintiff, Fraser Shipyard, claims $460,839.37 (Cdn.) for work done between about 17 December 1997 and 22 January 1998, say, at a current conversion rate to American dollars, $313,600. Fraser Shipyard submits the court should exercise its equitable jurisdiction and, in the special circumstances of the case, grant it an enhanced priority. Fraser Shipyard would like to see its claim moved from the position of a Canadian necessaries supplier to a position above that of a mortgagee and perhaps above that granted claimants with American maritime liens. The relevant circumstances and some comments are as follows:
"1. The cause of the repair work was a detention pursuant to the
Canada Shipping Act
and to the Memorandum of Understanding on Port State Control, the ship being in unacceptable condition from many safety aspects;
"2. The repair work rectified many major deficiencies which had caused the ship to be detained;
"3. As a result of the work done to the ship, by Fraser Shipyard, the sale price of the ship was enhanced, although the amount of the enhancement is not clear cut. Fraser Shipyard contends that without the repair work the sale price would have been based on scrap value;
"4. If no enhanced priority is granted, the creditors ranking above Fraser Shipyard will benefit from work done and equipment and material supplied by Fraser Shipyard;
"5. Fraser Shipyard were unaware that the shipowner was in financial difficulty, as contrasted with other creditors, ranking above Fraser Shipyard, who knew or ought to have known of the owner's difficulty and some of whom sat by while the Plaintiff added value to the ship against which those creditors had either a maritime lien or had security. Here the best that Fraser Shipyard is able to do is to point to the fact that some of the maritime liens, evidence of the shipowner being unable to meet its obligations, are fairly old and that ABN-Amro did have some general knowledge that repairs were taking place;
"6. With respect to the maritime lien claimants, it is said that the value of the ship at the time of lien attachment was less than its value after the repairs were done. However, this is not without a good deal of speculation, for not only are earlier values for the ship unknown, but also, when most of those claims of lien attached, the ship was a going concern;
"7. The American maritime lien claimants are not true maritime liens, but rather claims which are given the status of a maritime lien by American law, a benefit which Canada does not afford to Canadian claimants providing similar necessaries; and
"8. With regard to ABN-Amro, they are said to have been grossly undersecured and that may be, however, in these reasons I have concerned myself only with the first mortgage against the 'Atlantis Two', the current account facility, not with the second mortgage upon which, at the time the present proceedings evolved, ABN-Amro appears to have been undersecured. Fraser Shipyard also notes that none of the money loaned appears to have gone to the owner of the 'Atlantis Two', however one must remember that a mortgage by way of guarantee, as in the present instance, is perfectly valid."
Counsel for Fraser Shipyard raises a number of other points, many specifically directed against the bank, however I have already dealt with those points, to the extent relevant, in dealing with the possibility of ABN-Amro losing its priority. Here the issue is that of raising the priority of Fraser Shipyard.