[7]
This decision is based on the officer's assessment that the applicant did not demonstrate "ability to purchase or establish a business in Canada that ... will make a significant contribution to the economy or the cultural or artistic life of Canada" because:
1) he was unable to show how he intended to operate a business in Canada successfully competing in a market which the officer, admittedly without any detailed knowledge of the market, assumed was "already saturated";
2) he was not able to explain how this business would be of significant economic benefit to Canada, given the substantial "number of restaurants in the area you intend to establish" (i.e. 1000 restaurants of all types in Vancouver);
The perceptions of the market upon which the officer based these assessments were not disclosed to the applicant, yet they were relied upon as if the applicant could not appreciate them or contest them
.
3) the officer was not satisfied that Mr. Zheng was "the sole proprietor of the funds you claim you have", because, without raising her concerns about his ability to accumulate savings in the United States, she assumed he could not establish the funds held there in his name were in fact his, particularly the increase in funds from September 1999 to July 2000. Moreover, she ignored other funds claimed to be his which were located in China.
This was done without alerting the applicant to her reservations which contradicted the evidence that he presented about his resources
.
4) the officer awarded two units for personal suitability, said in the letter of decision to be assessed on "adaptability, initiative, motivation and resourcefulness". In her affidavit the visa officer adds to these qualities an "ability of the Applicant to become successfully established in Canada in his intended occupation", that is, a "self-employed chef". That is not a classification separately included in the National Occupation Classification (NOC), which includes a classification "6241 Chefs". His work as a chef in China and in the United States was accepted and rated at four units for experience, but he was not considered to qualify as a "self-employed chef". In my opinion, the conclusion appears based most substantially on the officer's assessment of the applicant's ability to become self-employed in Canada. This confuses the assessment process as provided under the
Act
, a process described by Madam Justice Tremblay-Lamer in
Jing-Hui Cao v. M.C.I.
(IMM-6636-98, 4 July 2000 (F.C.T.D.)), as follows:
"[21] Pursuant to the
Immigration Regulations
, applications under the self-employed category involve a two-stage analysis. Applicants are assessed in accordance with paragraph 8(1)(b) and sub-section 8(4) of the
Regulations
and must also satisfy the regulatory definition provided at subsection 2(1) which describes a 'self-employed person' as 'an immigrant who intends and has the ability to establish or purchase a business in Canada that will create an employment opportunity for himself and will make a significant contribution to the economy of the cultural or artistic life of Canada'.
"[22] Paragraph 8(1)(b) of the
Regulations
directs the visa officer to consider the various factors listed in Column 1 of Schedule I, with the exception of the 'arranged employment' factor. Whereas subsection 8(4) of the
Regulations
confers upon the visa officer a discretionary power to award an applicant an additional 30 units of assessment if, in the opinion of the officer, the applicant will be able to become successfully established in his occupation or business."