[3]
Those paragraphs of the applicant's affidavit which are pertinent to the matters in dispute herein, are:
"3. That the applicants, Sa Ry Kha, Minh Kha, Kas Sal Thou, and Eng Chay Kha are all citizens of Democratic Kampuchea and reside at present in the Socialist Republic of Vietnam.
"4. That I am the sister of Sa Ry Kha, who is a widow, and Eng Chay Kha, who is not married.
"5. That Minh Kha and Kas Sal Thou are the minor children of Say [sic] Ry Kha.
"6. That our mother currently resides with myself and my spouse in the City of Ottawa.
"7. That I have given an undertaking of assistance with respect to the other applicants, a copy of which is attached as Exhibit 'B'.
"8. That the aforesaid applicants now resident in Vietnam and have obtained exit visas, copies of which are attached hereto as Exhibit 'A'.
"9. That the aforesaid applicants have made application for permanent residence in Canada and have been interviewed by employees of either or both respondents and have been refused as indicated in the copies of letters attached hereto as Exhibits 'C' and 'D'.
"10. That the grounds for the said refusal are that the applicants did not obtain the required units of assessment and that there is no demand in Canada for the type of employment to which they are suited as indicated in a letter, copy of which is attached as Exhibit 'E'.
"11. That the applicants, Sa Ry Kha and Eng Chay Kha, have obtained a guarantee of employment, a copy of which is attached as Exhibit 'F'.
"12. That I have sufficient living accommodation [sic] at the present in order that the other applicants may reside with myself, my spouse and my mother.
"13. That the combined income of our household will be approximately $47,000 per annum including the other applicants, myself and my spouse.
"14. That I have been informed by my solicitor that the respondent Minister of State for Immigration has been informed or is aware of the facts herein deposed as indicated in a letter, a copy of which is attached as Exhibit 'G'."
The affidavit was read over and interpreted to the applicant and sworn by her through the services of an interpreter, one Loc Tran.