[7]
The applicant's Exhibit "D", dated July 29, 1986, came from the office of the Minister of State for Immigration, one of the respondents herein. It runs:
"This refers to your letter of May 21, 1986, addressed to the Honourable Walter McLean, concerning the applications for immigration to Canada submitted by Sa Ry and Eng Chaay [sic] Kha (File No. HQ6-15622).
To qualify for immigration to Canada, assisted relatives required either a validated job offer or a history of employment in an occupation which has been identified as offering reasonable prospects of employment with a minimal impact on the Canadian labour market. Additionally, they must demonstrate the potential for successful establishment in Canada. Sa Ry and Eng Chaay's [sic] applications were carefully assessed and refused because they were unable to meet our assessment criteria. The former was assessed as a hairdresser's helper and her only employment as such was at home. Eng Chaay [sic] worked at home as a jewellery solderer and neither spoke the English or French language. Also, we have noted that the job offers from the Independent Linen Service were not validated.
The humanitarian and compassionate aspects of these cases were examined; however, it became apparent that insufficient grounds exist for special consideration. At the time of these applicants' interview, they indicated that they had a married sister living in Vietnam. It appears, based on information presented to us, that Sa Ry and Eng Chaay [sic] are not alone in Vietnam and can benefit from the emotional support of each other and their sister. Added to this is the fact that they are able to earn a living and do not appear to be suffering unduly when compared with other Vietnamese residents in similar circumstances.
Apart from some Vietnamese Government employees, life for the largest percentage of applicants would seem to be virtually unaffected by a refusal to issue an immigrant visa to a person who has been granted an exit document. The Vietnamese have assured our officials that persons not accepted by Canadian authorities will be reintegrated back into their society. It is, therefore, unlikely that these applicants would experience undue hardships.
Lastly, although it is true that these applicants could conceivably be considered as refugees, and therefore the point system would not be applicable, the applicants must nonetheless demonstrate that they could successfully establish themselves in Canada. As Sa Ry and Eng Chaay [sic] lacked this important requirement, visa officials felt that there is little likelihood that they would be accepted as refugees.
I realize that my reply is not the favourable one you desire; however, I hope that I have given you a better understanding of the reasons for the decisions in these cases.
. . . . .
[signed]
Departmental Assistant
- Immigration"