[13]
In invoking subsection 6(2) above, the applicants' counsel in perforce invoking Regulation 7 which in its most pertinent parts provides:
"7.(1) Where a visa officer has determined that a person is a Convention refugee seeking resettlement, the visa officer, for the purpose of determining whether that Convention refugee and his dependants
will be able to become successfully established in Canada
, shall take into consideration
(a) each of the factors listed in column I of
Schedule I
;
. . . . .
"(3) Where a Convention refugee seeking resettlement makes an application for an immigrant visa, a visa officer may issue an immigrant visa to him and his accompanying dependants if he and his accompanying dependants
(a) meet the requirements of the Act and these Regulations; and
(b) in the opinion of the visa officer,
will be able to become successfully established in Canada
." (emphasis added)
Counsel for the applicants also sought support for the nonresidents' application in the Indochinese Designated Class Regulations. Pertinent provisions of those Regulations are:
"2. In these Regulation,
'Indochinese Designated Class' means a class of persons the members of which
(a) are citizens or habitual residents of a country listed in the schedule,
(b) have left their country of citizenship or former habitual residence subsequent to April 30, 1975,
(c) have not become permanently resettled,
(d) are unwilling or unable to return to their country of citizenship or former habitual residence,
(e) cannot avail themselves of the protection of any other country, and
(f) are outside Canada and seeking resettlement in Canada.
"3. The Indochinese Designated Class is hereby designated for the purpose of subsection 6(2) of the Immigration Act, 1976 as a class the admission of members of which would be in accordance with Canada's humanitarian tradition.
"4. The Immigration Regulations, 1978, other than sections 7 to 9 and subsection 14(1) thereof, apply to members of the Indochinese Designated Class.
"5.(1) Where a visa officer has determined that a person is a member of the Indochinese Designated Class, the visa officer, for the purpose of determining whether that member and his dependants will be able to become successfully established in Canada, shall take into consideration
(a) each of the factors listed in column I of Schedule I to the Immigration Regulations, 1978;
(b) whether any person in Canada is seeking to facilitate the admission or arrival in Canada of that member and his accompanying dependants;
. . . . .
"(2) A person who,
(a) in the case of an individual, is a member of a group of not less than five individuals, each of the members of which is a Canadian citizen or permanent resident, has attained at least eighteen years of age and resides in the expected community of settlement, or
. . . . .
may seek to facilitate the admission or arrival in Canada of a member of the Indochinese Designated Class and his accompanying dependents where
(c) each member of the group or the corporation has given a written undertaking to the Minister to make provision for lodging, care, maintenance and resettlement assistance for the member of the Indochinese Designated Class and his accompanying dependants for a period of one year,
. . . . .
"(3) Where a member of the Indochinese Designated Class makes an application for an immigrant visa, a visa officer may issue an immigrant visa to him and his accompanying dependants, if he and his accompanying dependants
(a) meet the requirements of the Immigration Act, 1976 and these Regulations; and
(b) in the opinion of the visa officer,
will be able to become successfully established in Canada
." (emphasis added)
The schedule to these particular Regulations designate only three countries: Democratic Kampuchea, Peoples Democratic Republic of Laos; and Social- ist Republic of Vietnam.
Indochinese Class Status